But a powerful population doesn’t ensure concentrated change. Research by Gold House in 2018 with 500 of the top Asian Pacific leaders across business, culture, and activism indicated a universal prioritization of four core challenges—with the first being enhancing how the media portrayed us (or didn’t at all). As they say, seeing is believing. Media representation became the unifying battleground through Crazy Rich Asians, the first Asian-led major studio project in 25 years. In 2018, many studio executives did not believe that Asians were a viable market—partly due to our 7% domestic population at the time. But by adapting successful galvanization models by Black churches in the late 80s and from women in the 2000s, several industry leaders jumpstarted Jon M. Chu’s critically-lauded romantic comedy with a promotional engine now known as #GoldOpen, using theater buyouts and other viral tactics to guarantee that Crazy Rich Asians was a hit at the box office. Since then, #GoldOpen has ensured the opening weekend success of more than two dozen Asian-led films including, most recently, Everything Everywhere All At Once. Prioritizing market viability isn’t new. Creators can come from anywhere but haven’t always been able to go everywhere. Marketing has always been half the battle—most easily evidenced by its percentage of total theatrical release budgets. YouTube was and continues to be the bastion for minority creators to reach the mainstream. In 2010, for instance, 25% of YouTube’s top categories were Asian-led; accessible bandwidth and ubiquitous smart device distribution gave permission to niche creation. Beyond YouTube, a recent study conducted by Nielsen and Gold House indicated that streaming platforms like Netflix have twice the AANHPIs of broadcast programs. And, of course, there’s K-pop, whose listening share grew 65% annually since 2015 on Spotify and Apple Music and even more during the pandemic. Alongside demonstrative distribution, the Asian Pacific diaspora won the ability to influence storytelling upstream. Through increased budgets for inclusive content development and production as well as cultural consultation practices that dismantle pernicious stereotypes, more authentic projects have flourished. This inclusive influence has accelerated due to executive greenlighting power. From Netflix (the platform’s Chief Content and Marketing Officers are Asian women—Bela Bajaria and Marian Lee Dicus) to a legion of studio chiefs including Albert Cheng of Amazon Prime Video, Asad Ayaz and Nancy Lee of Disney, Ramsey Naito of Paramount and Nickelodeon Animation, and Agnes Chu of Condé Nast Entertainment, diverse leaders have demonstrated the power and imperative of inclusive crews, casts, and colleagues for all marginalized communities. Super producers like AUM Group and Significant Productions’ Nina Yang Bongiovi utilize their own outfits for enabling multicultural filmmakers who don’t just create great art—but great art that challenges societal canon. At conglomerates like CJ, leaders like Vice Chair Miky Lee and ENM Chief Global Officer Steve Chung and Kakao’s recent majority stake in SM (creating the largest non-Western-based music label) continue to leverage inclusion and cultural specificity to commercial and critical acclaim around the world. When you don’t have a seat at the table,