CONNECT WITH US IDEAS CULTURE HOW THE ASIAN GOLDEN HOUR DAWNED How the Asian Golden Hour Dawned From top left, clockwise: Neon/Everett Collection; Noh Juhan—Netflix (2); Allyson Riggs—A24 (3); Kevin Winter—Getty Images; Sanja Bucko—Warner Bros. Pictures/Everett Collection; Robin L Marshall—WireImage/Getty Images; Kerem Yucel—AFP/Getty Images IDEAS BY BING CHEN AND JEREMY TRAN MAY 1, 2023 9:00 AM EDT Chen is an impact founder and investor as CEO and Co-Founder of Gold House, the leading cultural ecosystem uniting, championing, and investing in Asian Pacific creators and companies. Previously, he was a principal architect of YouTube's multi-billion dollar creator ecosystem. Tran is COO and Co-Founder of Gold House. Previously, he was an attorney at O'Melveny & Myers and is a Harvard Law and Harvard College graduate. G rowing up a Third Culture kid between Dolly Parton’s Knoxville, Tenn., late-90s Shanghai, and 2000s Southern California engineers a unique loneliness. After all, when you belong to so many places, do you belong anywhere? But as my single mother once said: When you can’t come home, you build your own. Like all minorities, the Asian Pacific diaspora is perennially hyphenated. We’re tugged between the nations of our ancestors and our present; we contend with simultaneous incongruities that prevent us from self-realization and collective coordination. Executives who break the “bamboo ceiling”—Asians are the least likely demographic to be promoted to management, according to Harvard Business Review—face imposter syndrome. And if they’re able to regain their confidence, many worry that they’re perpetuating the Model Minority Myth that overshadows income disparities within our community—and furthers our own divides with other marginalized groups. Our multilingual upbringings foreignize us; adopting certain Western behaviors can deny critical elements of our own heritage, something some demonize as a Sunken Place. Within our own community, our dozens of ethnicities, hundreds of dialects, and lack of a universal story or struggle further our fracture. Yet, despite our ostensive misalignment and our continued need to combat hate aimed at Asian Pacific communities, our diaspora has seen a golden wave of cultural and economic progress—that has broken records and defined industries in short order. May 1st marks the beginning of Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander (AANHPI) Heritage Month. Each year, to spotlight the Asian Pacific diaspora’s most impactful societal contributions, Gold House releases the A100—our own TIME100. This year, journalist Alex Wagner, YouTube CEO Neal Mohan, actor Ke Huy Quan, fashion designer Anna Sui, and baseball player Shohei Ohtani all made the list, which covers industries ranging from politics to business to entertainment to fashion to sports. This is our 6th year publishing this list. And with so many Asian Pacific leaders in prominent positions around the world, it’s never been harder to winnow the 100. Put simply: we’re in the midst of a golden hour. But how? Why did this happen, seemingly, within only the last few years? Population growth contributes. Our diaspora in the United States nearly doubled between 2000 and 2019—and buying power has, similarly, skyrocketed by 127% from 2000 to 2020.