CONNECT WITH US ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION WHY THERE'S SO MUCH PREGNANCY TRAUMA ON TV AND PODCASTS RIGHT NOW Why There's So Much Pregnancy Trauma on TV and Podcasts Right Now Succession; House of the Dragon; Fleishman Is in Trouble HBO (2); FX; Getty Images BY ELIANA DOCKTERMAN SEPTEMBER 19, 2023 4:28 PM EDT Spoilers for House of the Dragon, Succession, The Last of Us, Yellowjackets, Fleishman Is in Trouble, Dead Ringers, This Is Going to Hurt, The Retrievals, and Exposed. The first of many horrific birth scenes in House of the Dragon made me vomit. The king is desperate for a male heir, and the queen is in labor with a breech baby. At the king’s command, a maester (a healer with a medieval understanding of science) cuts the queen open. There’s plenty of blood, but the most disturbing moment comes when the queen realizes what’s about to happen to her without her consent. She dies and so does the baby. I ran to the bathroom to throw up—though I was admittedly pregnant at the time so my stomach was easily upset, as was my psyche. I didn’t know it then, but that pregnancy was an ectopic pregnancy—a nonviable pregnancy that occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus. Left untreated, the embryo would have expanded until it ruptured my fallopian tube. It is the kind of pregnancy that would have certainly killed me had I been born prior to the 20th century, including the Middle Ages or whatever time period the Game of Thrones universe claims to parallel. Still, some things don’t change even with the lifesaving advances of modern medicine. Even today, ectopic pregnancy is the leading cause of maternal mortality in the first trimester. And the treatment for the loss of a much-wanted pregnancy is still physically and psychologically traumatic. This year I got pregnant again, and much to my relief, the embryo implanted in the correct spot. But as I’ve turned on the TV at night to relax, I’ve found myself repeatedly confronted by the travails of pregnancy and childbirth. Even beyond the fantastical realm of Games of Thrones, there was Fleishman Is in Trouble, the adaptation of Taffy Brodesser-Akner’s novel about a mother who disappears after experiencing a mental break partially precipitated by a traumatic birth experience; This Is Going to Hurt starring Ben Whishaw as an ob-gyn working in a chaotic delivery ward; Dead Ringers, in which Rachel Weisz plays twin gynecologists performing experimental treatments on women; an episode of Yellowjackets that featured a teen delivering a stillborn baby in the woods; an episode of The Last of Us in which a woman gives birth while being attacked by a zombie; Succession, which spent much of its season tracking a pregnant Shiv trying to hide her growing belly from the sexist corporate world; and now the latest season of American Horror Story, subtitled Delicate, which centers on an actor who, after multiple failed IVF attempts, begins to suspect that someone is intentionally interfering with