her journey to motherhood. (L-R): Sophie Nélisse as teen Shauna and Jasmin Savoy Brown as teen Taissa in Yellowjackets season 2, episode 5 Kailey Schwerman—Showtime Read More: A Subversive New Dead Ringers Reboot Makes Cronenberg’s Original Look Tame True-crime podcasts, which for better or worse the culture now consumes as a form of entertainment, have found fodder in the topic too. The Retrievals, a Serial and New York Times investigation into a nurse who stole fentanyl from patients undergoing egg-retrieval surgery at the Yale University Medical Center, became the podcast of the summer. The nurse’s deception left patients in unimaginable pain, and when they complained, their doctors dismissed them. And just last week, the team behind the ultra-popular true crime podcast Dr. Death dropped the first episodes of its latest show, Exposed: Cover-Up at Columbia University about an ob-gyn who sexually assaulted patients for more than two decades. Writers have always turned to pregnancy and birth for drama—never forget Bailey delivering while her husband was in brain surgery on Grey’s Anatomy or Peggy not realizing she was pregnant until she was in labor on Mad Men. Call the Midwife has churned out 12 seasons centered on birth. Jane the Virgin turned what could have been a traumatizing moment—an accidental artificial insemination—into fodder for comedy. And pregnancy as body horror has been a mainstay since Rosemary’s Baby (1968) and Alien (1979). Dead Ringers is itself a remake of a 1988 David Cronenberg film, though series creator Alice Birch has gender-flipped the conniving twin doctors in the new adaptation. But lately, these tales in television and podcasting have proliferated and expanded their scope to reckon with how pain in pregnancy and childbirth can be compounded by flawed and patriarchal systems: A family system in which the father is encouraged to prioritize a child over a partner and mother, a medical system that’s overstretched and blatantly ignores women’s pain. Set against the backdrop of last year’s Dobbs decision, the horror of being caught up in an uncaring system without true autonomy takes on new resonance. Watching and listening to these shows as a pregnant person was uncomfortable—perhaps unwise—but it was also a relief. When I lost a pregnancy, I felt alone. I thought I knew only a handful of women who had miscarried and none who had had an ectopic pregnancy. I was wrong. Once I started talking about my experience, I found many friends had struggled with fertility issues, loss, traumatic births, and even ectopic pregnancies. I had reported on pregnancy and motherhood since long before I was expecting myself, yet I had to enter this terrible cabal of suffering women to understand the true extent to which the quest to become a mother can take a toll. I felt seen by these shows, even if I couldn’t finish all of them. Some of the recent depictions have more compelling things to say about the state of womanhood than others. In House of the Dragon’s first episode, the soon-to-be-dead queen tells her