ProPublica. “Something must be wrong with me for being uncomfortable because he’s a doctor.” The first episode centers on a woman who called the police after the doctor licked her vagina during her first postpartum checkup. Hadden was arrested after that incident, but Columbia allowed him to see patients days later under supervision. According to ProPublica, he continued to practice for five weeks after that, and eight patients claim he assaulted them during that time. When Hadden stopped practicing, ProPublica reported, Columbia sent a letter with no mention of the arrest or acknowledgement of any harm that may have been done. “Dear Valued Patient,” it began. “We regret to inform you that Dr. Robert Hadden has closed his private practice at Columbia University Medical Center.” In 2016, the Manhattan DA accepted a plea deal with Hadden that did not require him to serve jail time. It was only after more victims came forward that federal investigators charged him with sexually abusing his patients. Hadden was sentenced in 2023 to 20 years behind bars. It is tempting to pin the trend of investigating trauma in pregnancy on the overturning of Roe v Wade, but many of these projects were conceived before the Supreme Court’s ruling. Still, anyone who was paying attention (or watched or read The Handmaid’s Tale) feared what was coming. I don’t think “Dobbs” is ever uttered in The Retrievals, but it haunts the story of women lying prostrate, immobile, in pain as the medical system does what it will to them. Valentine explicitly cites the battle over Roe v Wade as an inspiration for her book and this season of American Horror Story. The creators of House of the Dragon, too, have suggested the birth scenes are a nod to the grim reality of post-Roe America by repeatedly describing them as “timely.” For some watchers and listeners, these tales may feel like the long-awaited validation of women’s stories. Game of Thrones caught flak (including from me) for making rape was a mainstay on the show. Even the most traumatic scenes, like Sansa’s assault, focused on the pain of a male witness instead of that of the woman being violated. House of the Dragon can often feel like an apology for its predecessor. Here: Instead of watching men cut limbs from one another and gouge each other’s eyes out, watch women die pushing babies out instead. Matt Smith and Emma D'Arcy in House of the Dragon Ollie Upton—HBO Within the text of Fleishman, a female journalist-turned-stay-at-home-mom rails against the male journalists who have gotten to write about their exotic adventures while her perspective and experiences are not considered worthy of magazine features. Of course the reader is aware that Brodesser-Akner has smuggled a story about the female experience and female trauma into a book you initially thought was about a man. (The “Fleishman” in the title turns out to be the wife.) Perhaps the crises of our time demand a closer look at the moment that brings us closest