daughter, “The childbed is our battlefield. We must learn to face it with a stiff lip.” That metaphor is hammered into the audience’s head again and again. In just seven episodes, three characters endure three horrific births. One mother dies by suicide after asking her own dragon to burn her alive rather than submit herself to an unmedicated C-section. “We felt that was an interesting way to explore the fact that for a woman in medieval times, giving birth was violence,” showrunner Miguel Sapochnik explained to The Hollywood Reporter. Perhaps it was interesting the first time, but as many critics agreed, by the third time, the point had been made. The birth scene in Yellowjackets carries with it the equally unsubtle message: Stripped of the formalities of civilization, we’ll revert to a cruel and primal existence, and birth is no exception. The pregnant teen is one of a group of high school soccer players who have been stranded by a plane crash and turned to cannibalism. One of her friends reassures her, “Women have been giving birth for millions of years” before labor begins, an old adage of natural-birth practitioners—and a line, if you’re familiar with the beats of fiction, that all but dooms the young mother to a disastrous delivery. The teen seems to have a case of placenta previa, which would usually require a C-section, but without access to medical care, the baby dies in childbirth. Ashley Johnson in The Last of Us Liane Hentscher—HBO The mother of the protagonist Ellie in the post-apocalyptic series The Last of Us faces a similarly grim fate: She goes into labor while being hunted by zombies. Though she manages to deliver the baby, she is bitten and thus fated to become one of the undead. She asks her friend to shoot and kill her shortly after cutting the umbilical cord. In a more optimistic twist than the other two shows, Ellie becomes immune to zombie bites because of the method of her birth, a final gift from her dying mom. Fleishman Is in Trouble has a more complex take on the trauma of a birth that doesn’t go according to plan. A mother named Rachel (Claire Danes) comes to the realization that her ob-gyn failed to request her consent before manually breaking her water. When she reacts in shock and asks her husband Toby (Jesse Eisenberg) to remove the ob-gyn, the ob-gyn replies, “I think we might need to get psych in here” before turning to Rachel and asking, “Are you planning on being a baby or delivering a baby?” It’s an instance of gaslighting and a breaking point for Rachel. Like approximately 3% to 16% of women who give birth, Rachel has postpartum PTSD. Toby can’t manage to empathize. He complains that she retells the story too often and overdramatizes it. When, after they’ve separated, she fails to pick up the kids and disappears for days, he spends most of her absence calling her selfish rather than considering that she