is in crisis and needs help. In contrast, when Rachel finally attends group therapy for victims of assault and lets out a primal wail, the women surround her, hold her, and comfort her. Read More: About that Horrific Birth Scene in Fleishman Is In Trouble Shiv on Succession also faces patriarchal challenges, if not the same violations. She strives to hide her pregnancy from her brothers, semi-estranged husband, and others in their orbit knowing that they will disqualify her as heir to the family business—a prediction that’s borne out when she does reveal she’s expecting and is met with sexist dismissals by the man buying her family’s company and the next President of the United States. At the end of the show, it’s her husband who ascends the corporate ladder despite the fact that he’s far less competent, and she becomes little more than a vessel for her father’s eventual heir. Her efforts to put off the inevitable while dealing with the realities of her changing body had me squirming—from a moment when she deftly avoids taking a bump of cocaine to one when the actually pregnant actor Sarah Snook falls down some stairs. Then there are the meditations on how a broken medical system can compound the problems women face. Dead Ringers shows viewers the gynecological realities usually left on the cutting-room floor in Hollywood—tampons, C-section scars, the group of cells that leaves the body during a miscarriage. Showrunner Birch largely renders them as normal functions of a female body. Yet the show also skewers the way capitalism and wellness interact in the American medical system: The private birthing center that the twin ob-gyns are trying to open privileges the wealthy and discards those who need help the most. Rachel Weisz in Dead Ringers Niko Tavernise—Prime Video This Is Going to Hurt deals more explicitly with a different kind of health care system: one that is publicly funded and resource-strapped. Even more graphic than Dead Ringers – one of the very first births in the British series begins with a baby’s hand poking out of the birth canal – the show focuses more on the worn-down doctors at an understaffed maternity ward than the individual patients rolled in and out of their lives on gurneys. There are no heart-to-heart chats or blooming romances like on Grey’s Anatomy or ER. The sheer number of births serves to educate audiences on why the most important and often distressing day of your life as a birthing person is just another moment in a series of brutal workdays for the sleep-deprived medical staff. They’re suffering, yes, but it’s the patients—for whom one mistake can mean life or death—who are the actual victims, particularly those on the wrong side of the class divide. Read More: This Is Going to Hurt Is the Best Medical Drama in Years And yet several of these stories suggest that the trauma of birth and pregnancy are inescapable even for the privileged. This is certainly true of Fleishman Is