in Trouble’s Rachel, an Upper East Side striver whose husband is a doctor at the hospital where she gives birth, theoretically conferring advantages upon her. Similarly, the upcoming season of American Horror Story focuses on a famous actor (played by Emma Roberts) who becomes convinced that someone (possibly a character played by Kim Kardashian who appears to be pregnant with a spider in posters for the show) is manipulating her chances of getting pregnant with subterfuge, like leaving her IVF medication out overnight. When Roberts’ character is told she miscarried, she remains sure there’s still something inside her. "It's a novel exploring…the medical gaslighting that even modern, very privileged women experience as they're going through their pregnancies and the symptoms that I feel we as a culture still don't talk about for strange reasons,” Danielle Valentine, who wrote the book upon which the season is based, told Entertainment Weekly. But the most unsettling tales of all aren’t some fiction involving dragons or spiders, but true stories of what real women have endured at their most vulnerable. Within just the past three months, two podcasts have revolved around medical providers who victimized women seeking treatment. In The Retrievals, patients’ hopes of building a family collide with the realization that their insides are being literally scraped out without the pain medication they were promised during their egg-retrieval procedure. We already knew that women’s medical issues are under-researched, their problems dismissed as delusions: Doctors used to diagnose women with “female hysteria” instead of treating their very real pain, and in the trailer for American Horror Story, the pregnant character’s partner pointedly tells her to “stop being hysterical.” But what struck me about the podcast was not the cruelty of the nurse who stole their pain medication, the doctors who ignored their screams, or even the institution that failed to offer support. It was how many of the women who underwent retrievals at the Yale University Medical Center rationalized the pain they experienced before they found out the truth, and even afterward. They either thought they deserved it in some cosmic way because their bodies had failed to perform this basic biological function of creating a baby, or they expected it because they associated motherhood with pain. When Yale eventually sent a letter to the victims informing them of what happened, it wrote that there was “no reason to believe this event has had any negative effect on your health or the outcome of the care you received.” Though the circumstances of The Retrievals seem extraordinary, the similarities between its stories and those of another new podcast are eerie. Exposed, released in conjunction with reporting from ProPublica and New York Magazine, deals with a betrayal of trust at another esteemed institution. It focuses on hundreds of patients who accused Columbia University ob-gyn Dr. Robert Hadden of sexually assaulting them, often during pre- or postnatal appointments, and here, too, some women found ways to play down their experiences. “I immediately started rationalizing it,” one told