Avram Alpert learned when he wrote his recent book, The Good-Enough Life, which explores how the pursuit of greatness harms individuals, communities, and society at large. Initially, Alpert says, he wanted to focus on how learning to be pleased with "good" instead of “great" might affect individuals' happiness and well-being. But it felt impossible to say with a straight face that people should “chill out and be good enough” in the face of huge societal barriers like wealth inequality, racism, and sexism. “If you say, ‘I’m going to be good enough. I’m not going to be overly ambitious and I'm not going to pursue every last award and every last degree and I'm not going to try to rise to the top of the pyramid,’ and then you find you’re doing that but society isn’t respecting that,” Alpert wondered, where does that leave you? Checking out of the greatness grind often requires a safety net that millions of Americans living paycheck to paycheck or in poverty simply don't have. It is one thing to tell someone who is already financially comfortable that money can’t buy happiness. But what about someone struggling to pay the rent or put food on the table? How could anyone tell them to be content with less? “We shouldn’t have layers of society where people have to work that hard and live in those dire conditions,” Alpert says. But since we do, choosing mediocrity is perhaps the greatest privilege of all—and one that historically has available only to white people, says Michael Harriot, author of Black AF History: The Un-Whitewashed Story of America. "A Black person has to work twice as hard as a white person to get half as far," Harriot says. That means choosing to be average often isn't an option for people of color, just as it isn't for others who have to swim against the current of discrimination every day, including those who are not able-bodied, cisgender, or heterosexual. But, at the same time, "we can't expend all of our energy and work ourselves to death trying to accomplish things that are unachievable because of systemic issues," Harriot says. He bristles against the narrative that "rugged individualism and hard work is how [people of color] get ahead in America, when we know that's not true." Individuals can't fight against centuries of systemic oppression on their own. It was that realization that led Amil Niazi to write a viral 2022 essay about renouncing ambition, which she is now adapting into a book. Niazi felt for a long time that being exceptional was her only choice. “I’m an immigrant. I grew up very poor. I’m a woman of color,” Niazi says. “I was never able to be mediocre. I would not be able to be where I am today if I had just sat back and said, ‘It’s okay for me to be average.’” But even decades of striving didn't prevent Niazi from being passed over for professional opportunities and promotions, which she says