central idea promoted by the fitness and nutrition influencers who first made cycle syncing popular online is the idea that a healthy body is one in which unspecified hormones are “balanced.” Their goal is to regulate the body’s regulators, which in a healthy person fluctuate as needed in order to do things like maintain your core temperature and put you to sleep after a long day. Unlike hormone balancing efforts, however, cycle syncing is about indulging, rather than controlling, the natural ebbs and flows of certain hormones. The menstrual cycle is operated by specific hormones, like follicle-stimulating and luteinizing hormones, and causes near-constant fluctuations in others, including estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone. We know a lot about what these patterns look like and some of their more standard effects on the body that appear throughout the four phases of a cycle. During the late luteal phase, for instance, which occurs just before menstruation, progesterone plummets, which can have a destabilizing effect on mood. In serious cases, this is recognized as premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), but nearly anyone who’s been a teenage girl or lived with one has experienced some of progesterone’s mental effects. Similarly well-documented peaks and valleys in libido, thermoregulation, skin health, and taste perception, are all possible, but vary from person to person. While different syncing apps have different approaches—some are more geared for exercise fanatics, others have a more New Age vibe—they’re all pretty much the same when stripped down to their fitness plans. During the menstrual cycle, suggested exercises are simple activities along the lines of gentle yoga and pilates, though Nike suggests high-intensity interval training, or HIIT, for those who have the energy. HIIT tends to be recommended for the follicular phase, which occurs for roughly a week and a half following menstruation, when users are told to expect abundances of speed, power, and creativity. The much-shorter ovulatory phase is similarly high-octane, while in the luteal phase users are encouraged to embrace the natural energy letdown by focusing on flexibility exercises and other low-impact movement. “Based on my experiences, and my knowledge about anatomy, and physiology, and the menstrual cycle, I think there's some merit to it,” says Amy Tremback-Ball, a professor of physical therapy at Misericordia University who’s studied the menstrual cycle’s effect on college athletes. “For those who might be training for something and knowing that they’re going to push—like bumping up two miles or four miles in a run—I think there is a better time to do that to avoid injury.” Tremback-Ball, formerly an ultramarathoner, says that her most serious running injuries occurred during her luteal phase, when connective tissue can weaken. However, none of the programs address the unique hormonal landscapes of the growing number of people who use any form of hormonal birth control, including pills, patches, and IUDs, as well as those who are pregnant, menopausal, suffering from endocrinological disorders, or using any sort of hormone therapy. While future products may address these populations, for now cycle-syncing apps remain exclusively