CONNECT WITH US HEALTH HEALTH CARE Cycle Syncing Won’t Fix Women’s Fitness mature woman in studio running, stretching and meditatingWe Are—Getty Images BY HALEY WEISS SEPTEMBER 19, 2023 4:26 PM EDT W hile most of the video series and programs available on the popular “holistic wellness”/fitness site Alo Moves—owned by the trendy activewear line Alo Yoga—are run by solitary instructors, the company’s newest offering is marked by photos and videos of a group of four women pulled close up against one another and roaming Hawaiian beaches. It’s a clearly symbolic presentation of the company’s new SYNCD program, a collection of 24 videos designed to guide users through self-care and fitness activities customized for each of the four phases of the menstrual cycle. The program, which launched in late August, is the latest—and likely not the last—in a wave of offerings from fitness and wellness purveyors looking to latch onto the recent popularity of a workout method known as “cycle syncing.” Unlike the push-through-the-pain approach of training during menstruation women athletes have adopted for decades, cycle syncing invites those same people to instead allow their exercise—and often, other lifestyle elements—to be dictated by not only their periods, but their entire menstrual cycles. The four instructors leading SYNCD’s classes, Alo Moves says, are all enthusiastic practitioners of the strategy. Cycle syncing is one of the biggest topics in women’s health right now. Since the release of a Nike cycle-syncing program via their Training Club app in 2022, Google searches for the term have more than tripled. The last six months have seen an explosion of at-home programs and apps, including offerings from big players like the period-tracking app Flo, the activity-tracker WHOOP, and the at-home fitness company Tonal. On TikTok and Instagram, some personal fitness creators offer their own plans online for a fee, designed for followers to use alongside a period-tracking app. If your own favorite lifestyle or exercise brand doesn’t yet encourage cycle syncing, chances are high that they’ve got something in the works. In theory, such an approach sounds like a welcome change, given that women have historically been excluded from sports science; in practice, experts say that these programs can be overly generous in their interpretations of a limited amount of research about the physical and emotional effects of the menstrual cycle. Where content creators and the companies behind new programs say cycle syncing can help people better attune to their bodies, critics worry that the technique could promote a harmfully reductive and narrow vision of how the menstruating body works. The specificity of these programs simply can’t apply to everyone, says Tory Eisenlohr-Moul, a clinical psychiatrist at the University of Illinois at Chicago. “Given what we know about how differently people react to the cycle ... you’re contributing to this misogynist idea that all females are driven by their hormones.” Hormones throughout the cycle Cycle syncing taps into the wellness world’s current obsession with hormones, the chemical messengers that drive key physiological functions of the body. A