focused on those with unaltered menstruation. What does the research say? Cycle-syncing programs frequently claim they’re designed using the latest research on athletic performance throughout the cycle, but often neglect to mention that just about all of that research has been done on elite female athletes, who aren’t representative of the typical customer of these programs. What’s more, the research is still less than a decade old, and the flurry of preliminary studies in recent years are still raising more questions than they answer. Among their findings include the possibility that building muscle could be easier during certain parts of the cycle and that there is a connection between the higher rates of orthopedic injuries in female athletes and looser, more injury-prone joints during the ovulatory phase, when the body is prepared for potential implantation. They’re groundbreaking findings, but it could be years before any universal real-world application materializes. The preliminary studies most relied on by cycle-syncing programs are survey-based, and reiterate what people who menstruate have so often been told to ignore—that it can suck to exercise on your period. Researchers asking menstruating athletes including professional rugby and soccer players to report the effects of their cycle have all found that over 90% of respondents cite the menstrual phase as a time when they’re lower energy or feel less physically and mentally powerful. It’s the underlying, less-technical message of these types of studies—that the body can no longer simply be ignored—that cycle-syncing programs have latched onto. Menstruation is just one piece of the puzzle Eisenlohr-Moul, who studies menstrual hormones in the brain, says cycle-syncing programs seem to be predicated on the assumption that menstrual hormones are the most powerful forces in determining your mood and energy at any given moment. But it ignores the multitude of other physiological and mental factors that play a role in how someone feels. “Exercise is so much about the brain and your ability to make yourself do things that are sometimes physically uncomfortable,” she says. For those without PMDD and similar serious hormonal problems, factors like how much stress they’re under at work or how many hours they slept the night before can easily overshadow cyclical changes in mood or energy. Be aware, too, Eisenlohr-Moul says, of what any new fitness program may be asking of you outside the gym. Alo Moves’s SYNCD includes not just workouts and meditation sessions, but guidance on making a turmeric tea for ovulatory pain and dry brushing the skin to promote general detoxification and decrease water retention. Though they may have value as enjoyable rituals, neither of these practices are backed by empirical evidence. They’re easy to skip, but “if you're a person who kind of tends to spiral into a compulsive place with those kind of rules, then you might want to back off,” says Eisenlohr-Moul. Tremback-Ball and Eisenlohr-Moul agree that cycle syncing should be viewed as more of a learning experience than a strict regimen, simply because the variety in how individuals experience their menstrual