after he lost the 2020 election. Trump: “It was my decision.” pic.twitter.com/yXp3AQtqz4 — Meet the Press (@MeetThePress) September 17, 2023 Trump denies involvement in Biden impeachment efforts Trump denied any involvement in efforts to impeach President Joe Biden, which was announced on Sept.12 by House Speaker Kevin McCarthy. McCarthy said that Republicans had drawn evidence pointing to a “culture of corruption” in the Biden family, and were investigating whether President Biden benefitted from his son, Hunter Biden’s business deals abroad. Trump said that he had not spoken to McCarthy about the current impeachment inquiry, noting: "I don’t talk to him like that." He added that McCarthy would not have taken that decision based on him. Trump says he needed 22,000 more votes to win the election, but is still adamant the race was rigged Trump said that he needed about 22,000 more votes in order to win the 2020 election, but he fell short of admitting that he lost. "I say I won the election," he told Welker, when she asked if he was acknowledging that he didn't win. WATCH: Former President Trump says he needed ’22,000 votes’ in each state to win in 2020, but falsely claims he still won KRISTEN WELKER: When you say you needed one-tenth of a point, you needed one-tenth of a point to win? FMR. PRES. DONALD TRUMP: I needed a very small — I… pic.twitter.com/zcLrTvS993 — Meet the Press (@MeetThePress) September 17, 2023 Trump speaks out against abortion bans with no exceptions The former President also spoke out against abortion bans that had no exceptions for the health of the mother, or in cases of sexual assault. “Other than certain parts of the country, you can’t — you’re not going to win on this issue,” Trump said, signaling that Republican legislators would not get popular support for passing broad abortion bans. “But you will win on this issue when you come up with the right number of weeks.” Trump did not specify the exact scope of abortion regulations he would support but said he would work on a number that both sides would agree with. Trump is open to picking a female running mate Trump, who remains focused on winning the Republican presidential nomination, said he still has not picked a running mate. The former President revealed that he will “pick the best person,” but likes the idea of choosing a woman. Welker pointed out South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, who fully endorsed Trump during a September rally, as a potential candidate for Vice President. Trump called the governor “fantastic.” “Certainly she’d be one of the people I’d consider, or for something else maybe. But we have a lot of people. We have a lot of great people in the Republican Party,” Trump said. If picked, Noem seems likely to accept, according to an interview with Newsmax on Sept. 7. Trump says he could resolve conflicts between Russia and Ukraine The former President also said that he could resolve conflicts between Russia and