CONNECT WITH US POLITICS DONALD TRUMP DONALD TRUMP DISCUSSES HIS INDICTMENT, THE UKRAINE WAR, ABORTION ON Donald Trump Discusses His Indictment, the Ukraine War, Abortion on Meet the Press Donald Trump spoke with journalist Kristen Welker for a televised interview. Anna Moneymaker / Getty Images BY SOLCYRE BURGA SEPTEMBER 17, 2023 3:51 PM EDT F ormer President Donald Trump, who is vying for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination, appeared on NBC's Meet the Press on Sunday. In an interview with Kristen Welker, Trump spoke about his criminal charges, the possibility of him selecting a female running mate, his stance on the Republicans' abortion policies, and more. Trump, who has been indicted four times, currently faces 91 criminal charges related to attempts to overturn his 2020 election loss in the state of Georgia, illegal retention of classified documents, defrauding banks and insurers, and falsifying business records to hide hush-money payments to adult film star Stormy Daniels, who claims she had a sexual encounter with Trump prior to the 2016 election race. The former President has continuously claimed his innocence and has pleaded “not guilty” in court. Trump has also continued to allege that the 2020 election was rigged. More From TIME 0 seconds of 5 minutes, 40 seconds 00:00 05:40 Despite his legal troubles, Trump is hoping to be the 2024 GOP presidential nominee, where he is facing off against candidates like Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and his own former Vice President Mike Pence. During his sit-down interview with Welker, the businessman covered a number of controversial topics. See the highlights, below. Trump discusses the possibility of pardoning himself if he's elected Trump says that he chose not to pardon himself before leaving the Oval Office, saying he “had no interest in ever thinking about it.” “The last thing I’d ever do is give myself a pardon,” Trump told Welker. “The last day I could have had a pardon done that would have saved me all of these lawyers and all of these fake charges." Trump added that it's "very unlikely" he’ll pardon himself in the future if he gets elected because he believes he has done nothing wrong. Trump did not listen to lawyers who said he lost the election Former President Trump admitted that he challenged the 2020 election, despite top administration officials and lawyers advising him that there was no evidence of fraud. Asked why he ignored them, he said: "I didn't respect them as lawyers." He added that he did not listen to campaign attorneys because those lawyers were “RINOs,” which stands for Republicans in Name Only. Trump, however, did abide by the suggestions given to him from other outside attorneys. But the ultimate decision was his. “I listened to myself. I saw what happened... my instincts are a big part of it, that's been the thing that's gotten me to where I am, he said. WATCH: Kristen Welker asks former President Trump to clarify if he was listening to his lawyers’ advice or his own instincts