CONNECT WITH US POLITICS DONALD TRUMP THESE ARE THE KEY DATES IN DONALD TRUMP'S LEGAL CASES—AND RE-ELECTION BID These Are the Key Dates in Donald Trump's Legal Cases—and Re-Election Bid Donald Trump Pleads Not Guilty to 2020 Election Charges in Federal Court 0 seconds of 1 minute, 24 seconds Loading ad BY NIK POPLI UPDATED: AUGUST 31, 2023 12:16 PM EDT | ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 3, 2023 2:22 PM EDT A fter being criminally indicted in a fourth case on Aug. 14, former President Donald Trump is now facing the prospect of being put on trial at least seven times in the next year, clogging up his campaign calendar with multiple court appearances that intersect with key events on the 2024 political schedule. If the trial dates stay the same, Trump could clinch the GOP presidential nomination before voters learn whether he has been convicted on any of the charges, raising new questions about the logistical and political challenges of multiple trials unfolding against the backdrop of a presidential campaign. Trump is currently facing criminal charges in four different states. He also faces three separate civil suits. Read More: A Guide to All of Trump's Indictments—and Where Each Case Stands It’s unclear if the unprecedented slew of legal activity will hurt Trump politically. In the immediate aftermath of his first two indictments, Trump raised millions of dollars and his polling soared. But it could hurt Trump simply by taking away his time and attention. Typically, criminal defendants must be present in the courtroom during their trials, meaning Trump will likely have to step away from the campaign trail to stand trial. And while he can still run for President under criminal charges, it will open a series of unresolved legal and constitutional questions if he's convicted before—or after—he retakes the Oval Office. Here is a timeline of key dates for Trump in his legal cases and reelection campaign until Election Day 2024. Aug. 3, 2023: Arraignment in Washington, D.C. in Jan. 6 case Trump will make his first appearance in federal court in Washington, D.C. after being indicted in special counsel Jack Smith’s investigation into his alleged efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election leading up to the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the U.S. Capitol. Aug. 10, 2023: Arraignment in Florida in classified documents case Trump will be arraigned in Fort Pierce, Fla. after the Justice Department charged him in a superseding indictment with three additional felonies related to his alleged mishandling of classified documents after leaving the White House. Aug. 11, 2023: Protective order hearing in Jan. 6 case Trump will appear in federal court in Washington, D.C. for a hearing to address what he can publicly say about the evidence gathered in the case. Aug. 23, 2023: First GOP presidential primary debate Although Trump will qualify for the debate, he has signaled that he might not participate in the televised affair and questioned his need to share the stage with candidates who lag behind him in the