CONNECT WITH US
POLITICS
DONALD TRUMP
THESE ARE THE KEY DATES IN DONALD TRUMP'S LEGAL CASES—AND RE-ELECTION BID
These Are the Key Dates in Donald Trump's Legal Cases—and Re-Election Bid
Donald Trump Pleads Not Guilty to 2020 Election Charges in Federal Court
0 seconds of 1 minute, 24 seconds
Loading ad
BY NIK POPLI
UPDATED: AUGUST 31, 2023 12:16 PM EDT | ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 3, 2023 2:22 PM EDT
A
fter being criminally indicted in a fourth case on Aug. 14, former President Donald Trump is now facing the prospect of being put on trial at least seven times in the next year, clogging up his campaign calendar with multiple court appearances that intersect with key events on the 2024 political schedule.
If the trial dates stay the same, Trump could clinch the GOP presidential nomination before voters learn whether he has been convicted on any of the charges, raising new questions about the logistical and political challenges of multiple trials unfolding against the backdrop of a presidential campaign.
Trump is currently facing criminal charges in four different states. He also faces three separate civil suits.
Read More: A Guide to All of Trump's Indictments—and Where Each Case Stands
It’s unclear if the unprecedented slew of legal activity will hurt Trump politically. In the immediate aftermath of his first two indictments, Trump raised millions of dollars and his polling soared. But it could hurt Trump simply by taking away his time and attention. Typically, criminal defendants must be present in the courtroom during their trials, meaning Trump will likely have to step away from the campaign trail to stand trial. And while he can still run for President under criminal charges, it will open a series of unresolved legal and constitutional questions if he's convicted before—or after—he retakes the Oval Office.
Here is a timeline of key dates for Trump in his legal cases and reelection campaign until Election Day 2024.
Aug. 3, 2023: Arraignment in Washington, D.C. in Jan. 6 case
Trump will make his first appearance in federal court in Washington, D.C. after being indicted in special counsel Jack Smith’s investigation into his alleged efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election leading up to the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the U.S. Capitol.
Aug. 10, 2023: Arraignment in Florida in classified documents case
Trump will be arraigned in Fort Pierce, Fla. after the Justice Department charged him in a superseding indictment with three additional felonies related to his alleged mishandling of classified documents after leaving the White House.
Aug. 11, 2023: Protective order hearing in Jan. 6 case
Trump will appear in federal court in Washington, D.C. for a hearing to address what he can publicly say about the evidence gathered in the case.
Aug. 23, 2023: First GOP presidential primary debate
Although Trump will qualify for the debate, he has signaled that he might not participate in the televised affair and questioned his need to share the stage with candidates who lag behind him in the polls.
Aug. 25, 2023: Deadline to surrender in Georgia
Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis set a deadline of noon on Aug. 25 for Trump to surrender to authorities in Fulton County, Ga. for arraignment after she indicted him over his alleged efforts to overturn Georgia's 2020 presidential election results.
Aug. 28, 2023: Hearing in Jan. 6 case
Trump will appear in federal court in Washington, D.C. for a hearing before Judge Tanya Chutkan, who will set the trial date in the Jan. 6 case.
Sept. 6, 2023: Arraignment in Georgia case
Trump’s arraignment hearing in the Georgia case was scheduled on this date, though he plans to skip the proceeding after pleading not guilty and filing a waiver of arraignment. Although Trump has appeared in-person at each of his three previous arraignments, he was only required to attend the ones in New York and Miami.
Sept. 27, 2023: Second GOP presidential primary debate
Oct. 2, 2023: Trial in Trump Organization civil fraud suit
Start of civil trial in the $250 million lawsuit filed by New York Attorney General Letitia James accusing Trump and the Trump Organization of manipulating property valuations to get tax breaks and better terms on loans and insurance policies.
Oct. 23, 2023: First trial in Georgia case
Kenneth Chesebro, who was charged in the Georgia case, will stand trial nearly two months after being indicted. Willis asked the judge to schedule the trial for all 19 defendants—including Trump—on the same date.
Jan. 15, 2024: Trial in E. Jean Carroll civil defamation suit
Start of civil trial in writer E. Jean Carroll’s second defamation suit accusing Trump of defaming her in June 2019 when he denied having raped her in a Manhattan department store in the mid-1990s, claiming she was not his "type."
Jan. 15, 2024: Iowa Republican caucuses
Jan. 29, 2024: Trial in pyramid scheme class-action suit
Start of trial in class-action lawsuit accusing Trump and his company of promoting a get-rich-quick scheme that conned victims into forking over money.
Feb. 6, 2024: Nevada Republican primary
Feb. 27, 2024: Michigan Republican primary
March 4, 2024: Trial in federal Jan. 6 case
Start of the criminal trial in Special Counsel Smith's case related to Trump's efforts to remain in power after losing the 2020 election and his role in the events leading up to Jan. 6, 2021.
March 5, 2024: Super Tuesday primaries
March 25, 2024: Trial in New York state criminal hush-money case
Start of criminal trial in Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg’s case accusing Trump of falsifying business records to conceal hush-money payments to a porn star before the 2016 election.
May 14, 2024: Pretrial hearing in classified documents case
Start of a pretrial hearing in the classified documents case to address remaining issues about classified evidence or other matters related to the trial.
May 20, 2024: Trial in classified documents case
Start of criminal trial in Special Counsel Smith’s case accusing Trump of hoarding classified documents and obstructing the government’s efforts to retrieve them.
July 15-18, 2024: Republican National Convention
Nov. 5, 2024: Election Day
MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME
The Case for Mediocrity
How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine
Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show
Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World
Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity
How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled
You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers
The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023
Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time
WRITE TO NIK POPLI AT NIK.POPLI@TIME.COM.