Ukraine. “I would get him [Putin] into a room. I’d get Zelensky into a room. Then I’d bring them together. And I’d have a deal worked out... It would have been a lot easier before it started. Essentially for four years, I kept them from doing anything,” he claimed. Trump did not share his exact strategy for getting the countries to make a “fair deal." Russian President Vladimir Putin previously spoke highly of Trump’s claims that he could resolve issues between the countries rapidly, saying that he could not “help but feel happy about it.” When asked about what he made of Putin’s support, Trump said he “like[s] that he said that.” Trump’s actions on Jan. 6 Welker asked the former President about his actions on Jan. 6th, when thousands of rioters took over the Capitol building in Washington, D.C. protesting against Trump's election loss. During the attack on the Capitol, Trump told demonstrators to “go home,” adding that they were special and loved. Trump has faced staunch criticism for his remarks toward the rioters and is charged with conspiring to block the election certification process in Congress, among other election-related charges. Former White House Press Secretary Stephanie Grisham previously claimed, in an interview with CNN’s News Day, that the former President was "gleefully" watching the rioters via a television in the White House, rewinding the footage and watching their actions over and over again. During his Meet the Press interview, Trump declined to comment on what he was doing during the early hours of Jan. 6, and did not say whether he called military or law enforcement. When asked whether he would pardon figures who were at the attack on the Capitol, like Proud Boys leader Enrique Tarrio, Trump said that he would look into it. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM.