country of origin or another aspect of your identity, or identify with the trauma they’ve experienced, the risk of your own psychological harm may be especially acute. Knowing this can help you to recognize when additional protective measures might be especially helpful—such as lowering the sound on a video or minimizing the screen size to limit the emotional impact, all tactics used by professionals. Or you can read a newspaper article about an event instead of watching the raw footage, if you want to know the facts but minimize the salience. Dr. Keramet Reiter and others say another powerful way to maximize meaning and minimize harm is to discuss what you’ve seen, using it as a mechanism to connect with others. The sense of community such discussions can generate can also be protective. Recent research from psychologists Jonathan Haidt and Jean M. Twenge suggests that teenagers are experiencing unprecedented levels of loneliness and that there’s a link to the rising use of smartphones and social media. One study they conducted with colleagues analyzed results from a survey of 15-and 16-year-olds. The survey revealed an increase in loneliness in 36 out of 37 countries over a six year period (2012–2018). While this trend isn’t conclusively caused by social media, it correlates with its rise. Another study, led by UK researcher Rebecca Nowland, similarly found a rise in loneliness with increased digital engagement; however, that study also offers that social media may reduce loneliness when actively used to establish “new social connections.” One suggestion from this body of research into social media use and loneliness is to think about how to use social media to create connection—not replace it—the latter of which can exacerbate a sense of isolation. Read More: Generational Researcher Jean Twenge on How Smartphones Destroyed Gen Z—and What Parents Can Do About It The speed and scale of our exposure to graphic imagery has been exacerbated by current technologies, but the need to derive meaning from images that document events outside of our experience is timeless. Susan Sontag noted in her book Regarding the Pain of Others that each of us reacts to images in unique ways that are tied to our identities as well as our ideologies. While one person may view a photo from a war zone and feel a need to advocate for peace, another may identify with the individuals who were harmed and demand greater militancy. Images don’t “speak” for themselves—it’s up to each of us to imbue them with meaning, as well as to pull meaning from our witnessing. Back in Berkeley, California, our students weren’t always physically together as they looked at upsetting videos of violence, but they could talk with each other and understand each other’s experience, deepening their sense of community. Through this collective activity they could take collective action. Over the longer term, their work could be used to advocate for intervention, or potentially as evidence to help secure legal justice for those suffering in Myanmar. But in the shorter