CONNECT WITH US IDEAS PSYCHOLOGY HOW TO STOP DOOMSCROLLING AND FIND MEANING ON SOCIAL MEDIA How to Stop Doomscrolling and Find Meaning on Social Media Getty Images—Sean Gladwell IDEAS BY ALEXA KOENIG AND ANDREA LAMPROS SEPTEMBER 15, 2023 7:00 AM EDT Koenig and Lampros are co-founders of the Investigations Lab at UC Berkeley’s Human Rights Center and co-authors of Graphic: Trauma and Meaning in our Online Lives I n March 2021, students and staff from UC Berkeley’s Investigations Lab gathered in a Zoom room—physically separate due a spike in COVID-19, but together online—each square on their screens a glimpse into the others’ private pandemic worlds. But unlike most Zoom calls, they weren’t talking to or even looking at each other. Each was busy scanning the internet, scrolling through amateur videos and photos that had been posted to websites like Facebook and Twitter. The images showed real-time horrors unfolding in Myanmar: a young man riding with two friends on a motorbike on a quiet street, suddenly ripped by a bullet. A body flung into the back of a truck. Wailing family members beseeching someone, anyone, to account for their loss. These students are part of a growing community of digital researchers who gather potential evidence of genocide, war crimes, and human rights violations from the internet, sometimes thousands of miles from the sites of atrocity. Since 2016, the Investigations Lab we founded at the Human Rights Center, a multidisciplinary research institution on the UC Berkeley campus, has trained hundreds of students how to search social media for information about possible human rights violations. We founded the Lab to create a pipeline of professionals with the latest research skills, but also to support the work of journalists, human rights researchers, and lawyers who may not have the training or time to find reliable data online to strengthen their investigations. The work isn’t easy. Long hours reviewing videos and photos of some of the worst things human beings can do to each other can be emotionally taxing. That’s why early in the Lab’s existence, we began searching out science-based approaches to preventing secondary trauma—the emotional distress that can come from experiencing others’ pain second-hand, including in online spaces—and to train our students in best practices. We’ve since interviewed dozens of experts and reviewed research that spotlights ways to handle harmful content that can be as valuable to our personal livesas our professional ones. These experts shared numerous tactics, from increasing awareness of what especially affects you to “tips and tricks” for lessening the emotional impact of videos and photographs—strategies that can ultimately benefit all social media users, particularly students. Read More: Is Social Media Making Me Miserable? Today, most of us are tethered to our cell phones. While we aren’t necessarily scouring social media for evidence of war crimes like these student researchers, we may regularly stumble across graphic images on Twitter (now X), TikTok, or Facebook. Social media posts may expose us to children who’ve been killed in Ukraine, to people blinded