in protests, or to other horrors—even while making breakfast for our kids, working out in a gym, or scrolling Instagram for entertainment. This new world order begs the following questions: How can anyone—whether they work in human rights or not—witness the cruelties of the world without becoming numb to them? And how can we minimize the potential for harm and maximize the social and psychological benefits from our time spent online? While the strategies are numerous, three are especially powerful: Being intentional about your watching, sharing your experience with others, and minimizing needless exposure. Psychologists Metin Başoğlu and Ebru Salcioglu have explained that anxiety often comes from feeling like you have a lack of control over upsetting experiences, and depression stems from having a lack of hope that things will be better in the future. Whether we absorb the pain found online in ways that strengthen us versus sending us into a demotivated spiral depends not only on what we watch, but even more importantly on how we watch and why. According to UC Berkeley’s Greater Good Science Center, which explores the “science of a meaningful life,” engaging in actions with purpose can be powerful. These social science researchers define purpose as an intent to achieve a goal that is “both personally meaningful and makes a positive mark on the world.” Can we approach our news intake more intentionally in order to better protect ourselves online? What might that look like in practice? The idea of “bearing witness” can help bring meaning to our viewing. Medical anthropologist and global health pioneer Paul Farmer considered bearing witness as a form of observing with compassion and solidarity. It is viewing “done on behalf of others, for their sake (even if those others are dead and forgotten).” This experience can be incredibly meaningful for the observer. Such an approach can be contrasted with “doom-scrolling,” or robotically scanning one graphic image after another. Mindless intake can be especially damaging because of the potential scale of the exposure, the relative lack of analysis and context, and our own lack of agency. Criminal investigators, on the other hand, explained to us that their analytical process—scanning a photo for clues, having a reason to scrutinize something horrific—often helped to limit their psychological distress. In addition to being clear about our purpose, it’s important to limit exposure. War crimes and human rights investigators sometimes compare the graphic nature of information found on the internet to “toxic waste.” Would you mindlessly expose yourself or your family to radiation without taking precautions? Or do so at large scales or for long time periods, understanding how harm can accumulate over time? Though the pain of others should never be considered “waste,” this protective framing helps underscore the dangers of overexposure. Some of us may be especially vulnerable to secondary trauma. One indicator is whether you have experienced trauma yourself. And when you identify with the person who is being harmed in a social media post by way of language, ethnicity, gender,