Robinhood, which offers “commission-free trades of stocks, options, ETFs, and cryptocurrencies.” A primary platform where individual investors were purchasing and selling Gamestop stock, Robinhood became mired in controversy when the co-founders decided to freeze trading for GameStop on Jan. 28, 2021. The movie depicts the co-founders as being in the pockets of the hedge fund managers, despite their avowed mission to democratize access to trading. At the time, Barron’s reported that the company’s explanation that it “needed to restrict trading in those stocks until it could increase its collateral with the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation” was legitimate; regardless of the true motivation, the move was met with widespread criticism from everyday investors. Angelo stresses that she and Schuker Blum did not set out to vilify any one of these men on their own. “The villain of the film isn’t one individual, it’s a system that clearly has no transparency,” she says. As for where things stand now: Melvin Capital faced several lawsuits and shut down in 2022; Cohen still owns the Mets; and Robinhood reached a settlement in a class-action lawsuit after the congressional investigation concluded that “Robinhood exhibited troubling business practices, inadequate risk management, and a culture that prioritized growth above stability during the meme stock market event.” The working-class Redditors turned investors This stock saga could not be told without the contributions of thousands of investors who made the historic moment possible. In Dumb Money, their hopes, dreams, and solidarity provide the movie’s heart and key narrative tension. The film chooses to highlight these investors within four primary characters–Riri and Harmony (played by Myha'la Herrold and Talia Ryder, respectively), a college-aged duo saddled with debt; Ramos’ Marcus Barcia, a retail investor who works at a physical GameStop store; and Ferrera’s Jennifer Campbell, a single mother working as a nurse during the pandemic. The inspiration for Ferrera’s character was a woman named Kim Campbell, who like the character was a single mother and RN who took an interest in the r/WallStreetBets page as a source of both financial advice and entertainment. “The stock market is not just for people in suits, it's all sorts of people doing it,” Campbell tells TIME of her own interest in trading. When Gill’s movement took off, Campbell wanted in and purchased 100 shares of GameStop. “I thought, ‘This is going to happen, I can’t be the one that didn’t buy any,’” she says. “If they were going to the moon, I wanted to go too.” Campbell only sold five of those shares, making more from that sale than she spent on the investment of the 100. She still holds the remaining shares. Dumb Money depicts solidarity among characters like Campbell and Barcia, who didn’t know each other personally but felt that they were in this together, with a remarkable number of them holding out from selling shares to ensure they could stick it to the hedge funds above their own personal profits. “While it was going on, I did almost feel a