homage to his online username, “Roaring Kitty,” Gill is portrayed in the film as having gained a cult-like following from his fellow amateur, meme-friendly investors who connected with the videos he filmed from the basement of his Massachusetts home about his investments in GameStop. Despite his strong online presence that secured nearly half a million subscribers on his YouTube channel, the film presents Gill’s life as normal, a financial analyst living with his wife and child in a modest suburban home, whose main hobby aside from investing is running. Gill originally invested about $50,000 of his family's savings in GameStop, when its stock was going for about $5 a share. As he shared his strategy with his followers, who began to see the stock rise exponentially before their eyes, he was treated as a kind of folk hero. In February 2021, Gill was called to testify about his role in the saga to Congress’ House Financial Services Committee. During the hearing, he stated, “My investment in GameStop and my posts on social media were entirely my own. I did not solicit anyone to buy or sell the stock for my own profit.” It’s unclear how much Gill made from his GameStop investments, but at one point his investments reached $48 million in value. Gill has since maintained a private life out of the limelight. The filmmakers reached out to Gill, but had no direct contact with him for the making of the film. The hedge fund billionaires Nick Offerman as Ken Griffin and Seth Rogen as Gabe Plotkin. Courtesy of Sony Pictures Dumb Money also depicts the contributions of several hedge fund billionaires involved in the mayhem. For Mezrich’s book, the author spoke to dozens of high-level sources who are currently working or previously worked with key hedge funders in the story, as well as numerous billionaires who know them both professionally and socially. He reached out to additional hedge funders for the making of the film, but only got responses from a handful, according to a producer. Rogen plays Gabe Plotkin, the CEO of Melvin Capital, the hedge fund whose GameStop shorting bets backfired. Offerman plays Kenneth Griffin, the founder of the hedge fund Citadel, which helped aid a $2 billion bailout to Plotkin and Melvin Capital. (Puck News reported that Griffin is in a legal fight over his depiction in the film. In a CNBC Leaders interview on Sept. 18, Griffin refuted the claim, saying "I have other things to do with my life" and joking lightheartedly in response to a question about the filmmakers casting Offerman to play him: "If I could get Daniel Craig, you know, I’d prefer that. But, you know, Nick works great.") D'Onofrio, meanwhile, depicts Steve Cohen, the founder of hedge fund Point72 and owner of the New York Mets, which, similar to Citadel’s fund, invested $750,000 in Melvin Capital during the GameStop stock surge. Sebastian Stan and Rushi Kota play Vlad Tenev and Baiju Bhatt, respectively, the co-founders of financial services company