CONNECT WITH US
ENTERTAINMENT
TELEVISION
MOVIES
The Real People Behind 'Dumb Money'
BY MARIAH ESPADA
Pregnancy Trauma Is Everywhere on TV
BY ELIANA DOCKTERMAN
Paul Hollywood Answers GBBO Questions
BY EDWARD FELSENTHAL
'Wrestlers' Isn't Just for the Fans
BY JUDY BERMAN
More in Entertainment
The 'Winning Time' Finale Was a Travesty
The abrupt cancellation of the HBO series did a disservice to viewers and basketball fans alike.
By Sean Gregory September 19, 2023
YouTube Demonetizes Russell Brand’s Videos Amid Abuse Allegations
YouTube has stopped making payments to Russell Brand’s channel for breaking the site’s creator rules, following several reports alleging sexual abuse by the British celebrity.
By Thomas Seal / Bloomberg September 19, 2023
Reality TV Stars Organize
Amid strikes in Hollywood, a push to unionize reality TV stars lays bare the struggle to improve how they are treated
By Mariah Espada September 18, 2023
The Female Version of the Roman Empire
Men aren't the only ones with random obsessions. Women think about topics ranging from Taylor Swift to murder, according to a response to the viral TikTok trend.
By Moises Mendez II September 18, 2023
Russell Brand: Police Urged to Investigate Allegations
British politicians urged police to investigate sexual assault allegations made against Russell Brand by four women.
By Associated Press September 18, 2023
Hollywood Strikes Enter a New Phase
“The Drew Barrymore Show,” operating without its three union writers, isn’t the only daytime show to resume.
By MARK KENNEDY / AP September 16, 2023
Pablo Larraín Breaks Down El Conde
In 'El Conde,' Pablo Larraín turns Augusto Pinochet into a 250-year-old vampire whose impact is quite literally still felt
By Laura Zornosa September 15, 2023
'A Haunting in Venice' Ending Explained
How Kenneth Branagh's new Hercule Poirot movie adapts Agatha Christie's chilling 1969 novel 'Hallowe’en Party'
By Megan McCluskey September 15, 2023
Drew Barrymore Apologizes For Bringing Back Show During Strike–But Does Not Change Decision
Drew Barrymore has formally responded to the backlash she received for resuming the production of The Drew Barrymore Show amid the ongoing Writers Guild of America (WGA) and the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television...
By Mariah Espada September 15, 2023
Drake and SZA's New Single Has History
Drake and SZA released a new song called "Slime You Out" today—their first ever collaboration. Here's the long history behind the song.
By Moises Mendez II September 15, 2023
Ashton Kutcher Resigns Thorn Role After Backlash
His move comes amid backlash over his support of Danny Masterson
By Belinda Luscombe September 15, 2023
Men Think About the Roman Empire A Lot
In a new TikTok trend, woman ask men how often they think about the Roman Empire. The consensus? All of the time.
By Moises Mendez II September 15, 2023
Amber Heard Barely in Aquaman 2 Trailer
In the new trailer for the Aquaman sequel, Amber Heard's character appears only briefly. Social media users took notice.
By Moises Mendez II September 14, 2023
Why You Should Be Watching 'Dear Child'
Netflix's new German thriller series unravels a dark web of secrets surrounding a mysterious woman's identity
By Megan McCluskey September 14, 2023
The Morning Show Mirrors the Sony Hack
In the second episode of the new season, UBA is attacked by cyber criminals in a very familiar setup.
By Moises Mendez II September 14, 2023
Fran Drescher on the Strikes and Labor
As the president of SAG-AFTRA, she's at the helm of one of the most significant labor events in Hollywood history
By Charlotte Alter September 14, 2023
1
2
3
...
1449
More from TIME
Does Cycle Syncing Actually Work?
These Are the Key GOP Players in the Government Shutdown Fight
How Canada-India Relations Crumbled