of the three. Around the turn of the century, however, large studies began to demonstrate an association between phenylpropanolamine and deadly brain bleeds, and so the market for phenylephrine and pseudoephedrine increased. Most manufacturers who used phenylpropanolamine switched to pseudoephedrine around 2000, Hendeles says—the most popular allergy medications at the time, including Claritin D, which led the market, all contained pseudoephedrine along with the standard antihistamines, which fight allergy symptoms triggered by the immune system, like itchiness and swelling. But pseudoephedrine at the time was also the easiest-to-acquire form of one potential key ingredient in the production of crystal meth, and with the passage of the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005, any medication containing it could no longer be sold on shelves; you didn’t need a prescription, but it was only accessible by pharmacists and all sales were tracked. “Companies didn’t want to lose the income from sales in front of the counter,” Hendeles says, “and phenylephrine could be purchased in grocery stores, convenience stores, airports, cruise ships—everywhere.” Reformulations and new options with phenylephrine proliferated. Today, there are 261 over-the-counter products containing the drug. Read More: Common Nasal Decongestant Doesn't Actually Work, According to FDA Advisors But not all manufacturers made the switch. Schering-Plough (since bought out by Merck), the maker of Claritin D, was hesitant, says Hendeles. “They were effective, and they didn’t want to make the switch unless it was going to give them the same efficacy,” he says. Internally, the company ran some of the first studies of phenylephrine since the 1970s, and sure enough, they showed that the last over-the-counter option was ineffective. So they chose to keep making Claritin D with pseudoephedrine, even though it meant the drug would have to go behind the counter. The makers of Zyrtec and Allegra followed suit with their pseudoephedrine products. Around the same time, in 2007, Hendeles’s University of Florida colleague Randy Hatton filed a public records request that granted him access to the dozen original studies on phenylephrine that the FDA had initially looked at decades earlier. Together, the two researchers concluded that the evidence showed oral phenylephrine at the allowed dose was no better than a placebo, and immediately filed a citizen’s petition asking the FDA to require pharmaceutical companies to test doses higher than the maximum allowed 10 mg of phenylephrine. In response, the agency assembled the Non-Prescription Drug Advisory Committee (NDAC) to address Schering-Plough’s findings and the concerns raised by Hendeles and Hatton. Amid conflicting presentations and interpretations of research given by the petitioners, manufacturers, and the Consumer Healthcare Products Association, which represents the industry, the NDAC ultimately voted “yes” on a resolution that the evidence on phenylephrine was “suggestive of efficacy.” Hendeles didn’t agree then, and today claims that the meeting was far from thorough and fair. “The head of the [NDAC] said that the ideal outcome of this meeting would be for the committee to say that it's effective and didn't need additional studies,” he says. “He said, ‘that way, we