won’t have to change the monograph’”—referencing, Hendeles says, the established rule sheet for a family of drugs. According to Hendeles, a chronically understaffed and underfunded FDA may have simply not been able to give the issue the attention it deserved at the time. In the FDA’s own recounting of the 2007 meetings, the agency suggests that some consultants present were likely swayed by the fact that studies have actually shown that phenylephrine can be an effective nasal decongestant. Of course, what the NDAC was supposed to be assessing in this case was its efficacy as an oral decongestant, processed in the gut. That the body metabolizes a drug differently based on method of administration isn’t unusual, but can certainly make specifying its usage more confusing. Following those meetings, the FDA also asked companies manufacturing oral phenylephrine test higher-dosage versions of their drugs, as Hendeles had requested. But two extensive studies by Merck found that even 40 mg of phenylephrine—a whopping four times the largest dosage being sold in Claritin pills in stores—was no more effective than a placebo. In 2015, “when we saw the results of this dose ranging study, Dr. Hatton and I went and submitted another petition” to the FDA, Hendeles says. “This time that petition was actually to remove the drug from the marketplace.” Though it took another half decade, that second petition, and its support from groups including the American Pharmacy Association, is a big part of what finally got the FDA to take its most recent look at phenylephrine. Another reason for the FDA’s recent move was the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, passed in 2020, which enabled the agency to more easily revise over-the-counter approvals and recommendations. If the FDA does decide to take phenylephrine off the market, it may signal to the market that more medications might be subject to new regulatory scrutiny. In the allergy aisle alone, Hendeles has a few other products in his crosshairs, including the cough suppressant dextromethorphan, found in Robitussin, and the mucus thinner guaifenesin, found in Mucinex. “The data that’s in the literature suggests that neither of those two are effective,” he says. For now, with no given timeline for a final decision from the FDA, phenylephrine is still on the market. Still, with flu season coming, a word to the wise and congested: It’s time to get comfortable with nasal spray. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. El nuevo