CONNECT WITH US POLITICS NATURAL DISASTER HOW HAWAII WILDFIRE RELIEF WOULD BE AFFECTED BY A GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN How Hawaii Wildfire Relief Would Be Affected by a Government Shutdown 0 seconds of 1 minute, 22 seconds Loading ad BY NIK POPLI AUGUST 29, 2023 5:19 PM EDT A fter devastating wildfires scorched the Hawaiian town of Lahaina this month, state and federal officials have been calling on Congress to approve billions of dollars in disaster relief to help support the island. But some lawmakers are worried that the money may get tied up in the looming government shutdown fight, which could delay the funding for disaster victims. “Shutting down the government is not an option,” Rep. Jill Tokuda, a Democrat who represents the Maui area in Congress, tells TIME. “This is about sending a message to every citizen in this country about how we take care of people in times of crisis and disaster. A government shutdown will slow down our recovery efforts.” The push to approve supplemental funding for Hawaii intensified on Tuesday when FEMA Administrator Deanne Criswell announced that the agency’s Disaster Relief Fund has a balance of just $3.4 billion, setting up the risk of it running out of money by September. She said that immediate needs funding would ensure that FEMA can continue to respond to disasters, but called on Congress to provide a long-term solution by passing $12 billion in additional funds for FEMA. But funding for FEMA may get caught in the battle over budget talks, complicating the likelihood of final passage. For months, Congress has been at an impasse on budget talks as far-right members of the party have pressured GOP leaders to further slash funding levels for various government agencies and include conservative policy provisions to restrict abortion and LGBTQ rights in the appropriations package. With budget disagreements unresolved, time is running out before a government shutdown takes effect on Sept. 30. House lawmakers, returning on Sept. 12, will have just 12 work days to pass 11 annual appropriations bills. If they don’t, billions of dollars of federal relief money for Hawaii in the wake of the largest natural disaster in its history could sit unspent as long as the government is shut down. More From TIME U.S. Congress Returns to Try to Avert Government Shutdown 0 seconds of 2 minutes, 17 seconds To try to separate the relief funds from the potential shutdown, Tokuda says that Democrats are considering using a discharge petition to get money out the door to FEMA—a process that enables a majority of the House to sidestep the speaker and committee chairs to push forward legislation on its own. But discharge petitions are a slow process: bills must sit in committee for 30 legislative days and then the petition needs to sit on a House calendar for seven legislative days before a vote can happen. Still, “A discharge petition is definitely one of the ways that we can look to continue to move such aid forward and over