to the Senate,” Tokuda says. “We have to consider every tool in our toolbox.” That’s not the only option to untangle Hawaii disaster relief from the spending package. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer last week announced that he would support passing a short-term bill to fund the government until December, giving lawmakers on both sides of the aisle more time to pass spending bills for the upcoming fiscal year. Some lawmakers are also eyeing the possibility of passing a stopgap funding bill, also known as a continuing resolution, to keep federal agencies including FEMA running. House Speaker Kevin McCarthy acknowledged the likelihood of a continuing resolution during a conference call with House Republicans Monday night, though some members of his party are opposed to the current proposal, which ties FEMA funding with funding for Ukraine. “I thought it was a good thing that [McCarthy] recognized that we need a CR in September. I’m supportive of that,” Schumer said on Aug. 14. “A CR until early December provides time for consideration of these bipartisan bills.” The fires that devastated Lahaina, a town of 13,000 people on the island of Maui, spread rapidly in mid-August after powerful winds from a hurricane moved through dry grasslands. 115 people have been confirmed dead, with hundreds more missing. According to Criswell, FEMA has already distributed more than $8.5 million to Maui, including $3.6 million for direct rental assistance. FEMA has encouraged survivors to register with the government to receive assistance, including an immediate payment of $700 to cover food and water. More than 1,000 federal officials were on the ground in the days following the fires, and close to 2,000 victims had been moved into hotel rooms on the island. But with several hundred people in the area still unaccounted for, federal officials are also looking to continue funding search and rescue operations. Tokuda says the additional $12 billion in disaster relief funds that Congress is considering giving FEMA may not be enough for rebuilding critical infrastructure like housing, schools, and health care facilities in Hawaii—especially as Hurricane Idalia heads towards Florida and other natural disasters are expected to take a slice of the funding. A potential government shutdown would slow down recovery efforts across the U.S., harming all communities impacted by hurricanes, tropical storms, and wildfires. “A disaster does not stop because the government shuts down,” Tokuda says. “The aid must not stop flowing into our community.” MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time