million doses of COVID-19 vaccine have been administered in the U.S., and data clearly show that COVID-19 vaccines are very effective in reducing severe disease risk and have an excellent safety record, as shown in very recently presented data. Notably, the risk of myocarditis following last fall’s updated COVID-19 vaccine was minimal, with two confirmed myocarditis out of about 650,000 doses, which is lower than after the primary series. There is recent discussion has been about when to get flu or COVID-19 booster shots. Because the effectiveness of the flu and COVID-19 vaccines can wear off after six months, it makes the most sense to get these vaccines in late October or November before the anticipated peak of illness during wintertime. Until there is a combination respiratory pathogen vaccine, these vaccines need to be administered separately. Flu and COVID-19 vaccines can be given simultaneously. Still, since the RSV vaccine is new, it has been recommended to wait two weeks after the RSV vaccine before other immunizations until more data are available. Common sense public health measures also play a role in combatting the tripledemic, as we can spread viruses to others when we are infected. First, we must avoid others, especially those with vulnerabilities, when ill. We also now have home testing available to diagnose each virus separately or in combination. This can lead to prescribing antiviral medication and treating symptoms when coupled with telemedicine or in-person office visits. Mask use may also be considered in high-risk settings, especially for those who are medically vulnerable. As part of this discussion of tripledemic action, we also need to recognize that issues related to COVID-19 have become politically polarized to the point where facts about the disease, its impact, its treatment, and its prevention are ignored. But we also need to recognize that COVID-19 now takes its place among the other common respiratory pathogens, and we have strong medical tools to address tripledemic viruses. With all the amazing preventative tools and treatments we now have, we can look forward to saying, “tripledemic severe disease, no more.” Correction, September 19: The original version of this story misspelled the monoclonal antibody developed by Sanofi and AstraZeneca. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture. We welcome outside contributions. Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.