deficit is likely to draw more attention as House Republicans return this week from a summer recess, as some are intent on shutting down the government to force Senate Democrats and Biden to accept spending cuts. A smaller group of Republicans, like Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia, are threatening to hold up funding the government to pressure House Republican leaders to open an impeachment inquiry into Biden, based on flimsy allegations that he was involved in his son Hunter Biden’s overseas business dealings. White House officials point out that Biden’s proposed budget would reduce the deficit by an additional $2.5 billion by increasing the corporate tax rate and requiring that the wealthiest 0.01% of Americans pay at least a 25% tax rate. But that doesn’t have the votes in Congress, and Republicans haven’t come to the table to offer a plan of their own for cutting the deficit. Administration officials also note that the deficit is influenced by various factors. “Deficits from year to year can be volatile,” said White House Press Secretary Karine Jean-Pierre in response to a question from TIME. “The President has a real plan — as we’ve laid out multiple times — to reduce the deficit, and we don’t see Republicans having a real plan.” Convincing voters that the economy has actually improved will be a central effort of Biden’s reelection campaign. Democrats know they have their work cut out for them, and arguments over whether the deficit is rising or falling under his leadership could muddle that effort. “I think it’s gonna be very important for us not to make the economic conversation over the next year about what the government’s done or what the White House has done, but what we’ve done together and how the American people got through COVID, built one of the strongest economies in American history,” says Simon Rosenberg, a veteran Democratic strategist. Part of that will be a robust television and online advertising strategy to change people’s minds. Adds Rosenberg: “I’m confident that over time and with money behind ads, that we’re going to be able to make our case successfully to the American people.” This year’s spike in the deficit may have made that hill a little steeper to climb. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM.