on your journey as an actor? Don't ever give up. And work hard to be ready when the opportunity comes. It's important to believe in yourself even when others don't. As an actor, we face rejections over and over again and during those difficult times, it's very easy to say, ‘You know what, I don't think I'm going to be able to do this. I don't think I'm right for this.’ Those thoughts have entered my mind many, many, times. You have to believe in yourself even when nobody else does and especially when those times get really tough, I think it's important to surround yourself with people who can cheer you on. What informs your process as a creative? How do you prepare for a new role or a new project? When I am given a role that I really want to play, I pour myself into it. I spend a lot of time thinking about the character, what I want to do with it. But it’s also what you bring to the set is really important because it affects everybody else. Moviemaking is a collaborative process and if you bring negative energy to it, then it sucks the energy out of everyone else. So I always try to be positive and practice gratitude. How do you think that your journey as an actor has impacted and influenced others? When I was a kid, I did those two movies and so many people from the AAPI community have come up to me and told me, ‘You know, you were the only Asian face on-screen when I was growing up.’ When I look at today's landscape, there are so many AAPI members working today and to think that I played a small role in maybe influencing them to pursue this business is incredible. It’s kind of a full circle moment for me because when I was struggling, I was looking at them and seeing how well they were doing and it gave me hope to believe I could do it again. The past decade has seen a big shift in how decision-makers in Hollywood are thinking about and approaching issues of inclusivity and representation both on and off-camera. How do you hope to contribute to that effort to create more opportunities for the next generation? Over the past few years, we have seen a lot of great Asian stories being told. It works because we have writers or agents who really understand our culture and can really put the nuances in to tell our stories authentically. Having great directors like John Chu and Destin Daniel Cretton who really excel in what they do is important, as is having producers and studios who are willing to give stories like ours an opportunity. But more work needs to be done. You've worked with many film legends like Steven Spielberg and Michelle Yeoh. Was there anything you learned from working with them? Steven is one of the greatest and most successful filmmakers and