CONNECT WITH US THE TIME100 IMPACT AWARDS Ke Huy Quan Wants You to Never Give Up on Your Dreams Ke Huy Quan Gabby Jones—ABC/Getty Images BY CADY LANG SEPTEMBER 12, 2023 9:18 AM EDT W hen Ke Huy Quan won the Oscar for Best Supporting Actor this March, no one was more surprised about the honor than Quan himself. It wasn’t the award so much as the journey to getting it that floored the actor, who broke into the film industry as a child actor in the ‘80s after immigrating to the United States from South Vietnam and spending time in a refugee camp. Though Quan had endearing and star-making turns as a kid in blockbuster films, finding work as an actor in his 20s proved to be far more challenging, especially given the dearth of roles available to Asian actors in Hollywood. Quan turned to working behind the camera, with jobs like stunt coordinating and assistant directing—but he never forgot his love of acting. Fast forward to 2023. Quan’s Best Supporting Actor win made him the second Asian actor to win the award and the first actor of Vietnamese descent to win an Academy Award. For Quan, his return to the silver screen is not just a testament to his perseverance or the dogged pursuit of a dream, but an opportunity to make opportunities and open doors for actors like him. Here, we caught up with Quan to talk about his comeback, his historic Oscar win, and the change he wants to see in Hollywood. What has surprised you most about your career so far? It's strange how life works sometimes because when I was certain that the last chapter of my career was written, my story not only continued, but there's been so much interest in what comes next. Throughout this whole journey, there has just been so much love and I'm very blessed to be on the receiving end of it. What did it mean for you to win your historic Oscar? I still think about it sometimes and cannot believe it happened. I think we've proven that anything can be possible. To be able to represent my community like that—it makes me so proud. You've spoken a lot about your childhood and how you left South Vietnam by boat and spent time in a refugee camp. How do you think that those experiences in your early life have shaped you as a person and also influenced your career as an actor? I think it gave me perseverance. Having to leave our home at a very young age and facing the uncertainty of what was going on, not knowing what's going to be on the other end, and seeing how my parents made a huge sacrifice for all of us—it made us a lot stronger, even though it certainly hasn’t been an easy road. When I think about it, it's a miracle that we're here. What do you think has been the most important lesson you've learned