life expectancy is 64.4. It’s also worth speculating on seemingly obvious reason why some cities, like Jackson, Miss., don’t post higher rates than 72.6. Jackson has higher homeownership rates than most places (94th percentile) and a higher percentage business ownership (59th percentile). But the recent water crises show how local politics of Mississippi play out in lower investments in the city’s water infrastructure, which plays out in other municipal services that impact life expectancy like education. “Social reforms move slowly,” wrote W.E.B. Du Bois, suggesting that we must learn from our circumstances in ways that reject intemperance and blame. “[W]hen Right is reinforced by calm but persistent Progress we somehow all feel that in the end it must triumph.” Society is toiling with the same struggles around racism that Du Bois faced at the turn of the 20th century. Nonetheless, we must take the time to recognize empirical signs of progress and not rush toward unsophisticated, untruthful narratives of hopelessness or blind ignorance that remove or dismiss our agency. A path of progress demands that we have a clear view of the social, political, and economic landscape in which we live. Recognizing progress and defeats will have us see the very real capacity for future change. The assumption—backed with data—that Black people in places with higher life expectancy had a hand in their outcomes should inspire us to seek change in places where discrimination is robbing people of years of life. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture. We welcome outside contributions. Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.