have been thoroughly penetrated by Israel and the U.S., as evidenced by routine acts of sabotage reported at Iranian nuclear facilities and the assassination of top nuclear scientists. Khamenei’s making the decision to weaponize also risks tilting the balance of power toward the Revolutionary Guards, who would likely control the nuclear codes (and aspire to control the country). Successive U.S. administrations have sought to defuse Iran’s nuclear program, and end the U.S.-Iran cold war, by either trying to engage the Iranian regime diplomatically or subjecting it to economic pressure in the hopes the regime will either capitulate or implode. None of these efforts has borne fruit. “Death to America” remains the Islamic Republic’s enduring slogan. But another pillar of the revolution is compulsory hijab. And a year after Amini’s death, thousands of Iranian women defy these rules daily, despite the regime’s use of Chinese facial-recognition technology to punish violations of laws of “hijab and chastity.” A woman, sans-head covering, at the Tajrish Bazaar in Tehran, Iran, Jan. 28, 2023. Arash Khamooshi—The New York Times/Redux The country’s economy is a shambles, and its former Minister of the Environment ominously warned that continued mismanagement of water resources could mean 50 million Iranians—70% of the country—“will have no choice but to leave the country.” Climate scientists say parts of Iran (which this year reached temperatures of 152°F) could be the first places on earth too hot to be inhabited by humans. After two decades of failure in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the disappointing outcomes of the 2011 Arab uprisings, the U.S. has little confidence that it can positively impact political outcomes in the Middle East. Indeed, absent a cohesive liberal opposition, an implosion of the Islamic Republic is less likely to be followed by an Iranian version of Jeffersonian democracy than by a military government. For now, it remains a security state commanded by an octogenarian cleric who has held the title of Supreme Leader since 1989, before most Iranians were born. “Everyone is just waiting,” a recent visitor from Tehran told me, “for the leader to die.” MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture. We welcome outside contributions. Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.