mystical at once, known as the Christ Pantocrator. Symmetry is pleasing in art, which makes the asymmetry of the Christ Pantocrator at least slightly unnerving: one eye is larger than the other, and Scorsese found himself in a stare-down. “The look, you know, the look was a loving sort of confrontational look. Like, who are you? What are you doing with your life? Who are you? What next? All these questions. Like, what, what, what do I do? It shook me, in a way.” Scorsese’s new movie, Killers of the Flower Moon, continues his quest for radical truth. Photograph by Mark Mahaney for TIME Mention Scorsese’s name, and everyone wants to talk about Taxi Driver, Goodfellas, Raging Bull—or maybe, even, about the delightful cameos he makes in Francesca’s TikTok videos. (In one of them, she asks him to identify common “feminine items,” among them an eyelash curler and a Beautyblender.) A surer way to clear out a dinner party is to bring up Silence, or Kundun, Scorsese’s ardent 1997 film about the life of the Dalai Lama, or, heaven forbid, The Last Temptation of Christ, which drew ire upon its release for its suggestion that Jesus wanted to sleep with Mary Magdalene. But those movies aren’t just outliers in Scorsese’s body of work. In their questioning spirit, they may be foundational for everything else, up to and including Killers of the Flower Moon, a picture that peers, deeply and uncomfortably, into the inhumanity of humans, knowing there’s no valid way to ask the forgiveness of those who’ve been wronged. Scorsese has lots of movie projects he wants to get to, among them an adaptation of Marilynne Robinson’s Home. He would also like to make another movie about Jesus, as he alluded last May, after having met with Pope Francis. “I don’t know what it’s going to be, exactly. I don’t know what you’d call it. It wouldn’t be a straight narrative.” It would, he suggests, build on some of the ideas he explored in Silence. “But there would be staged scenes. And I’d be in it.” It sounds, frankly, unfilmable—all the more reason to believe he’ll pull it off. The Christ Pantocrator will somehow be a part of Scorsese’s Jesus movie; he’s not quite sure how he’s going to get there, but he will. What is he doing with his life? He’s spent a lifetime figuring that out, and he’s nowhere close to being finished. The bush is still there; it’s still burning. CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. SHARE THIS STORY MORE FROM TIME100 LEADERSHIP SERIES The Enduring Hope of Jane Goodall By Ciara Nugent Lindsey Vonn on Being Judged for Her Injuries By Lindsey Vonn For Teen Tennis Phenom Coco Gauff, Wimbledon Is Just the Beginning By Sean Gregory Margaret Atwood Doesn't Think We're Doomed By Lucy Feldman Shonda Rhimes Already Knows What You're Going to Watch Next By Judy Berman