report landed just under a year later, and again the findings were unsatisfying—at least for people looking for intelligent life off the planet. There was no evidence that the objects were extraterrestrial in origin but no proof that they weren’t either. The idea that they were friendlies—classified U.S. military vehicles out for a beta-test spin—was ruled out, though if they were indeed classified, it’s unlikely that the chiefs of intelligence and defense would spill the beans. It was possible, the analysis concluded, that the vehicles were either Russian or Chinese, as both countries are known to be experimenting with hypersonic technology, but that was little more than a guess. The unidentified objects thus remained just that—unidentified. So it fell to NASA. In October 2022, the space agency independently announced it was establishing its own UAP study team, charging the group not with figuring out what the flying objects are, but rather, with establishing some kind of research and reporting program going forward. Three months later, the names of the panel’s 16 members were announced—including retired astronaut Scott Kelly, who in 2015 and 2016 spent nearly a year aboard the International Space Station; Anamaria Berea, a research affiliate with the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, Calif.; and David Grinspoon a senior scientist at the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson, Ariz. Yesterday, before the press conference, the team released its 33-page report. Among other things, the report called on NASA to work together with other branches of government, using its expertise in space technology to help determine what both previously seen and future UAPs are. The panelists also recommended leaning on artificial intelligence, machine learning, and satellite observations to better look for—and explain—the objects. The report did call for the selection of a single person at NASA to oversee all this work, and NASA agreed, announcing that a director of UAP research had indeed been tapped, but conspicuously declining to release his name—at least at first—out of concern for his safety. “One of the bigger things that happened during our study [was that people] harassed some of our panel members and that is very inappropriate behavior,” said David Spergel, the chairman of the study and the head of the Simons Foundation, a New York-based group that funds work in mathematics and the basic sciences. “Sadly, I think it's part of a deeper problem…on the web on social media.” But the secret couldn’t stay a secret. Repeatedly pressed by reporters during the media event, NASA decided within 24 hours to release McInernay’s name. The fact that we are here at all—with the world’s most accomplished space agency undertaking investigations that could eventually, at least in theory, point toward the discovery of intelligent alien life—is not as improbable as it seems. For years, brand names in the world of politics have been stepping forward to admit that there is something head-scratching about all that mysterious atmospheric traffic. In 2021, Harry Reid, who was Majority Leader of the Senate in 2007