as an opportunity to re-evaluate the vaccination program, and started from a blank slate,” he said. The work group therefore asked the CDC for more detailed data on who was being hospitalized, who was experiencing more severe disease, and who was dying from COVID-19, so it could better understand if certain populations were more vulnerable to complications and could benefit from vaccination. What they saw was that “Disease burden does vary greatly by age, but serious illness occurred across all age groups including among those without underlying medical conditions,” Daley said. “That was the most persuasive argument for me for universal vaccination.” Those data, coupled with the fact that many people did not get the most recent booster, means that overall immunity against SARS-CoV-2 is dropping, said Dr. Sandra Fryhoffer, associate professor of medicine at Emory University who was representing the American Medical Association at the meeting. “We are all more susceptible.” Most of the committee members agreed, but Dr. Pablo Sanchez, professor of pediatrics at Ohio State University-Nationwide Children’s Hospital, was the only member to vote against the recommendation. “I think we need to let the public know that the data on children is not there,” said Sanchez. “We need to level with our patients and say what is known and what is unknown rather than make a blanket recommendation, especially for groups for whom there isn’t data.” Sanchez argued for a recommendation that focused on the most vulnerable groups, such as people over 65 years, the immunocompromised, and pregnant people, and encouraged other groups to make individual decisions about getting vaccinated after discussing their risks and benefits with their doctors. Some committee members shared Sanchez’s concerns about the lack of data, but also pointed out that without a universal recommendation, current inequities in vaccine access would only deepen since those without access to health care would not benefit from individual discussions about their need for a vaccine. The updated vaccine will be the first COVID-19 shot to be distributed in the way most vaccines have in the past, prior to the pandemic, on the commercial market for around $120-$130 per dose, rather than purchased and provided for by the government. That means that pharmacies and doctors’ offices will purchase the vaccines at their own cost and get reimbursed for the shots. Most insurers, including Medicare and private companies, will continue to cover the vaccine, without co-pays, since it is recommended by the CDC. The Vaccines for Children program will provide shots for uninsured and underinsured younger kids. For older children and adults without adequate insurance coverage, the CDC announced that it will purchase shots and make them available at state and local health departments, as well as through retail pharmacies that participate in the Bridge Access Program until 2024. To sustain the program beyond that for adults, the agency hopes to secure additional funding to launch a permanent Vaccines for Adults program and extend the shots it provides beyond COVID-19 vaccines. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for