CONNECT WITH US HEALTH COVID-19 What to Know About the New COVID-19 Vaccine Booster 0 seconds of 1 minute, 58 seconds Loading ad BY ALICE PARK SEPTEMBER 13, 2023 9:28 AM EDT I n a long-awaited update to the COVID-19 vaccine schedule, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC)’s vaccine committee recommended that everyone six months or older should get another booster shot. CDC director Dr. Mandy Cohen endorsed the recommendation made by the agency’s committee of outside vaccine experts. That shot will be the newest vaccine greenlit by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) just a day earlier. The FDA approved mRNA vaccines made by Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech that target the XBB.1.5 variant for everyone 12 years or older, and issued an emergency use authorization for mRNA vaccines for children six months to 11 years. The FDA’s actions also mean that the updated vaccine is the only one authorized or approved against COVID-19; the previous booster, against BA.4/5 is no longer authorized. In a 13-1 vote, the CDC’s panel of vaccine experts decided that near-universal vaccination for everyone six months or older would provide the best protection against another serious surge in infections this fall and winter. Hospitalizations due to COVID-19 have been increasing since mid-July, CDC scientists reported, and while most of those have involved young children and older people, half of the children under five who have been hospitalized did not have underlying health conditions, a reminder that even otherwise healthy people can experience serious COVID-19 illness. Despite the near unanimous vote in favor of recommending the vaccine for most people, committee members raised several concerns. First, the new vaccines target the XBB.1.5 variant—which is no longer the virus causing the most infections in the U.S., but was the dominant virus earlier in the summer, when the FDA made the decision to switch to a new vaccine. At the time, the agency advised manufacturers to start producing shots targeting that variant. But XBB.1.5 has since been replaced by a handful of new strains, including EG.5.1 and BA.2.86. Moderna, Pfizer, and Novavax all presented data to the committee showing that their XBB-targeted vaccines generated good antibody responses against these new variants as well, but only Moderna’s data involved human cells while Pfizer and Novavax provided data from animal studies. (Novavax has not yet submitted a request to the FDA to authorize its XBB vaccine, but expects to do so soon when its studies are complete.) Some members questioned whether the updated vaccine should be recommended for most people, or just for those at highest risk of COVID-19 complications, such as the very young, the elderly, and those with compromised immune systems. Dr. Matt Daley, senior investigator at the Institute for Health Research at Kaiser Permanente Colorado, and the head of the CDC’s work group that reviewed the vaccine safety and effectiveness data, said that when the group began discussions earlier this summer, they did not assume that the updated vaccine would be recommended for everyone. “We viewed this