to legally earn money towards a more permanent setup. Dozens of migrant men who crossed the Southern border to flee dire economic crises in Mauritania and Senegal ran to a street corner in Brooklyn on Sunday afternoon to get free food from a mutual aid group in the Clinton Hill and Fort Greene neighborhoods. They include former mechanics, electricians, and construction workers struggling to find jobs and currently living at one of the city’s respite centers on Hall Street, near the Brooklyn Navy Yard. “It’s a miracle that any of us are alive. It’s impossible to live there. No one would risk their lives otherwise,” Mohamad Sow, a man from Mauritania at the respite center, says in French. Sow asked for his name to be changed for fear that it could negatively affect his ability to stay in the U.S. (Members of the mutual aid group handing out food translated from French to English.) The men are all worried about employment, as well as getting kicked out of their current dwelling because of a requirement for all single adult migrants to reapply for shelter every 60 days. Mayor Adams established the rule to provide more room for families with children, but these men don’t know where they’ll be able to stay next. Local bureaucracy has made it harder to get a city ID that would help migrants open bank accounts, access city services, and secure jobs—which would in turn help them get on the path to moving out of temporary housing. The migrants near Brooklyn Navy Yard say government forms ask for a residential address to get an IDNYC card, but the respite center won’t let them use the address where it is located. Some have had to use addresses of churches or mosques instead. But just the city ID still isn’t enough: The city notes that the IDNYC card can be used as proof of identity, but employers often require additional proof of work authorization. An official with the mayor’s office said they would look into the issue. A migrant from Mauritania washes rice at Bushwick City Farm, which had provided migrants who were staying in a shelter across the street with fresh produce and invited them to use their space for cooking, on Aug. 16, 2023. Jessica Rinaldi—The Boston Globe/Getty Images Amid the increasingly dire situation, a loose web of nonprofits and aid groups has developed to help migrants with everything from basic necessities like bedding, socks, and hygiene kits, to legal advice, to food. EV Loves NYC, the food insecurity nonprofit, says it delivers about 2,000 meals on Sundays to shelters and respite centers across the city. At the Sixth Street Community Center—the group’s home base—slabs of Hebrew text from when the building was a synagogue peek out behind murals of leftist leaders. “Hot chicken coming through,” yells one volunteer, as another packs rice into boxes. On Aug. 22, there’s an Indo-Chinese meal: coconut curry meatballs. A couple days later, the menu is fragrant rosemary chicken and