CONNECT WITH US U.S. IMMIGRATION WITHOUT WORK OPPORTUNITIES, MIGRANTS IN NYC STUCK IN OVERCROWDED TEMPORARY HOUSING Without Work Opportunities, Migrants in NYC Stuck in Overcrowded Temporary Housing Migrants waiting to be processed queue outside of the Roosevelt Hotel in Manhattan, on Aug. 1, 2023. Jeenah Moon—The New York Times/Redux BY SANYA MANSOOR AUGUST 30, 2023 7:00 AM EDT A li Sayyid, a father of six, tries to quickly change direction when his children hear the sound of an ice cream truck coming down a New York City street. He can’t afford it. “In Afghanistan, life was good and they were eating everything,” says Sayyid, who asked that his name be changed so he does not lose his family’s placement at the Roosevelt Hotel in midtown Manhattan. Watch More Sayyid was a civil engineer in Afghanistan in 2021. But after the Taliban’s takeover, he fled—first to Brazil and then across the Southern border into the U.S. He is among more than 100,000 migrants that have arrived in New York City over the last year. Many are desperate but unable to work legally—and trapped in the city’s overcrowded temporary housing in the meantime. Nearly 60,000 remain in the city’s care, according to the mayor's office. More From TIME Mutinous Soldiers in Gabon Say They've Ousted President 0 seconds of 2 minutes, 12 seconds “Since the spring of 2022, our city has borne the brunt of a national crisis—providing shelter and care for a population greater than the entire city of Albany,” New York City Mayor Eric Adams said in an August 24 statement. New York City has a right-to-shelter law, which means officials cannot legally turn away anyone seeking shelter. The city and state have been fighting in court over the best way to house the influx of migrants. The city of New York sued 30 New York counties for issuing emergency executive orders meant to ban the city for arranging asylum seekers to stay in private hotels like the Roosevelt, which remains a designated arrival center in addition to functioning as a shelter. Last month, dozens of asylum seekers slept outside the Roosevelt Hotel hoping to secure a room like Sayyid and his family. Construction starts on Randall’s Island in New York City on a shelter for recently arrived migrants on Aug. 14, 2023. Spencer Platt—Getty Images In response to traditional shelters reaching near-capacity in early June, the city created 206 emergency shelters, including respite centers in school gymnasiums and parking lots. These facilities were originally intended to house migrants only for a few days, so they don’t face the same kind of regulation that shelters do. Many are bare-bones spaces providing little more than a cot to sleep and a few meals. Advocates have slammed the city for some of these facilities lacking access to showers and serving frozen meals to residents. “The respite centers are at the bottom of the barrel… By announcing the emergency situation they bypassed all the laws in the last 40 years that have been