put in place,” says Mammad Mahmoodi, co-founder of EV Loves NYC, a nonprofit focused on food insecurity in New York City. Rules around cots being spaced out and having an appropriate ratio of bathrooms per people can be overlooked, he says: “All of that went out of the window." When asked about conditions at the respite centers, the mayor’s office stressed that this is an emergency situation and noted that all sites now have viable shower options. A spokesperson with the office says the city considers respite centers to function as waiting rooms and not long-term stays. But many asylum seekers don’t see a clear path to permanent housing. As the migrant housing crisis grows in New York City, asylum-seekers, advocates, and New York politicians are increasingly focused on a related problem: the slow, kludgy process for getting federal work permits. Allowing for speedy work authorization so migrants can better support themselves, the thinking goes, could relieve some of the pressure on temporary housing. “We need the federal government to allow asylum seekers to work, so they can provide for themselves and their families,” said Adams. Governor Kathy Hochul echoed his remarks in a public address last week—asking in particular to expedite work permits: “Let them work,” she said. The Biden Administration hit back earlier this week, recommending that the city and state improve data collection at intake, communication around needing to apply for work authorization and asylum, and ensuring case management and legal services are available at multiple shelter sites. New York Mayor Eric Adams, left, and city officials listen to a reporter’s question during a City Hall press conference, on Aug. 9, 2023. Bebeto Matthews—AP Sayyid and his family filed for asylum two weeks ago, but migrants need to wait 180 days after the application date before qualifying for a work permit. Work permit requests are taking about two months to process, according to a Department of Homeland Security (DHS) official. The agency notes that the 180-day waiting period is written into statute, so the agency does not have control over it—Congress does. While some migrants resort to working cash jobs in construction or delivery, Sayyid says he won’t consider that; if the police find out, it could tank his family’s asylum case. “I will not put my family at risk,” he says. In the meantime, money is tight. He says the city rejected his application for cash assistance two months ago and that it has only provided him with Medicaid and the shelter placement since he first arrived. “It's really time for the state and federal governments to take a more active role and to help people get work authorization,” says Kathryn Kliff, a staff attorney with the Legal Aid Society. “Without work authorization, you might get exploited or not have a steady income… They don’t feel like they have the protection to be able to work in a more above-ground job.” Sayyid is just one of thousands of migrants stuck in temporary housing without the ability