feeling of Bake Off. And as soon as they step into the tent, they just adapt immediately. Bake Off is set in stone. So whichever host comes in just brings their little twist. And this year Alison and Noel [Fielding] were fantastic, and it was a really good laugh. What is Alison's twist? Her laugh is contagious. And once she starts laughing, she'll set everybody off. It's tense for the bakers obviously, but I think the rule is, we try to give the bakers a little bit of calmness and a little smile while they're doing the work. Last season brought some criticism on a variety of fronts, including for Mexican week, with its maracas, serapes, and sombreros. Is that something you’ve reflected on? I spoke to a couple of friends of mine. The ones I spoke to, none of them were offended. I think most of the people who were offended weren’t even Mexican, which I found quite strange. Because there’s not a bad bone in Bake Off’s body. I was in Mexico filming a month before I started the series that year. And I spent a month traveling around working with amazing Mexican chefs. And that’s where some of the challenges came from. They came from a good place, never a bad place. Read More: The Great British Bake Off Backlash Has Reached a Boiling Point. Can the Show Be Saved? You’ve written so many books about bread. How do you keep coming up with new recipes? The key thing is experiment. When I first started making bread years ago, I was working at some of the best hotels in Europe. I was doing Stilton and walnut bread and cherry and chocolate bread—all these mad things. This history I’ve got in my head; I will remember something and go, “Oh, I haven’t done that for a while.” And then I’ll write it down and it will go in the next book. Sometimes to go forward you have to go back. Have you ever used an automatic bread machine? When I was just starting Bake Off, I was approached by The Gadget Show in the U.K. And basically they said, “There’s been another line of bread-making machines. Would you like to have a look at them?” I said, “Not really, no.” And they said, “Well, would you like to go head-to-head with them? We make the bread in the bread machine, you make a bread, and then we do a blind tasting with the public.” So I went head-to-head with seven bread machines and I got 96% of the vote. You can’t beat homemade breads made by hand. What’s the best advice you ever got, or have given, about baking bread? Weigh up really carefully. Having a good set of scales is critical. Because you get that right, and you’re 90% on the way to creating something that’s going to taste amazing. A good-­quality flour always makes a difference. Good ingredients in, and it’s a good bake at the