CONNECT WITH US ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Paul Hollywood attends the World Premiere of "The King's Man" at Cineworld Leicester Square on December 06, 2021 in London, England.Stuart C. Wilson—Getty Images BY EDWARD FELSENTHAL SEPTEMBER 19, 2023 3:18 PM EDT D uring the pandemic, The Great British Baking Show became in millions of homes, including mine, literal and figurative comfort food. Its contestants—gathered under a (literal and figurative) big tent—are eliminated one by one, week by week, in as genial and good-natured a format as exists anywhere on television. As my colleague TIME TV critic Judy Berman has written, binging old seasons of the show “practically qualified as therapy” during lockdown. This year, the show enters its 14th season, maturing but somewhat miraculously maintaining itself as an alternative to cattier, more intense, eat-or-be-eaten reality shows. Certain aspects of the show have morphed over the years—most notably roving co-hosts (British morning TV presenter Alison Hammond this season replaces comedian Matt Lucas.) But there has been one constant from the start: celebrity baker-turned-judge Paul Hollywood, whose blunt feedback, searing blue eyes, and eponymous handshake for outstanding bakes (you can track them at hollywoodhandshakes.com) have become the show’s trademark. I spoke with Hollywood ahead of the new season; episodes air weekly on Channel 4 in the UK starting Sept. 26 and on Netflix Sept. 29. (Our conversation has been condensed and edited for clarity.) My 15-year-old daughter and I recently went back to the beginning of The Great British Baking Show, and the technical abilities of the contestants seems like it’s just increased so much. I think it’s reflected in the handshakes [bakers get for stellar work], to be honest. The handshakes are more [frequent] because the standard of the baking has gone much higher. It attracted the better bakers. The show is a rare bastion of friendly competition. How have you maintained that over the years? There’s an honesty to Bake Off [as it’s known in the U.K.]. Sometimes my choice of words to describe what I’m looking at or tasting might be a little bit harsh. But I’m straight to the point. Other programs are quite destructive in their criticism, because all they want to do is shoot them down in flames and use that as the part of the program. Making and baking things for people nurtures more of a soft approach than it does an aggressive one. Read More: The 50 Most Influential Reality TV Seasons of All Time You have a new co-host this season, Alison Hammond. Part of the appeal of the show is the predictability—it’s comfort TV. How do you balance that against shake-ups and change? The bakers are the stars of the show, and they tend to lead how things progress. The format is pretty rigid. I suppose I’m the guardian of Bake Off. I don’t like change generally. So I like to keep things the way they should be. Everybody knows about the