aren’t all middle schoolers taught what anxiety is, what a panic attack is, and how best to manage them? What would it have meant for me two decades ago, as a 21-year-old college senior, to recognize that my sudden episodes of “nerves,” which made me feel like I was molting into a werewolf, were in fact textbook panics attacks, and to have had help in treating them? We all end up paying for that lack of intervention. In concrete terms there is the cost to our healthcare system of all those ER false alarms. That’s to say nothing of work absenteeism. Anxiety disorders likely cost the economy over $50 billion in 2020. According to the White House, and based on data from 2020, 29% of Social Security Disability Insurance beneficiaries were people with mental health disorders “or 2.4 million people—a share larger than beneficiaries who cannot work due to injuries, cancer, or diseases of the circulatory and nervous system, combined.” Familiar as my panic in Phoenix may have been, it still stung. Over the previous year I had committed to meditating and medicating away my panic. That afternoon punctured my fantasy of having been cured. Immediately after our live shot, I raced to Sky Harbor airport, dragging my carry-on and my shame hangover onto a Southwest flight bound for Los Angeles. Scanning Southwest’s self-seating aisle, I slumped into 13C, next to a woman quietly crocheting. We got to talking. It turned out she was no stranger to panic attacks. We communed over the extent to which the condition had touched our lives. As we did, I felt the sensation of a burden being lifted. This, sharing I realized, was good medicine. Read More: How Cuddly Comfort Objects May Help Adults with Anxiety Inspired, I started confessing my panic to colleagues, friends, strangers at parties, pretty much anyone who would listen. I set out in search of more formal settings to share—support groups. When I failed to find any nearby in Los Angeles, I enlisted the help of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, and the American Psychological Association. Even with their generous assistance, I was able to find on their registries only three operational panic-specific support groups in the country. By comparison, there are nearly 62,000 AA groups in the U.S. I am fortunate. I have a loving family and sympathetic colleagues, offering me both the emotional bandwidth and the means to support my journey toward the end of panic, a multi-year effort during which I tried everything including cognitive behavioral therapy, SSRIs, benzos, breathwork, ketamine, psychedelic mushrooms, and other hallucinogens. Not everyone has the same luxury, nor should they have to. We desperately need a more effective support structure for the panic and anxiety sufferers in our midst. We need support groups to fill the yawning void that I encountered when I first sought help. We need to embrace the range of treatments now available to sufferers—not just the prescription pills we