reflexively reach for in our search for a silver bullet (though prescription pills indeed work for some), but for alternative therapies like the ones I tried. In my journey, I found comfort in the words of holistic psychiatrist Ellen Vora, who allowed me to recognize the therapeutic power of crying. She told me we need “a cultural rebrand around crying,” and I’d argue that we need a similar cultural rebrand around both panic and anxiety disorders. Part of the reason for panic’s quiet prevalence may be that its sufferers typically do not explode. They implode. Their anxiety does not spill out into the streets, into fights or car wrecks. They often suffer unnoticed—unseen and unheard. It is all the more incumbent upon us, then, to open our eyes and ears to their hardship. For those still in panic’s chokehold, I can offer a few gentle words of counsel. Science tells us that the peak of an attack will likely last only 15 to 60 seconds – the time it takes for your brain to assess a threat. You will survive it; panic attacks won’t kill you, even if it feels like they will. And you're more capable, even in the most severe throes of panic, than you think. This is why people can continue driving capably, or reporting in my case, in the midst of a panic. To the unafflicted—or to those who haven’t yet suffered their first panic attack—I ask for understanding. We are your friends, family members, your colleagues. There are more of us than you think. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM. TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture. We welcome outside contributions. Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.