of Anxiety, believe the figure is closer to 50%. A panic attack is one of the few mental health phenomena that trick a sufferer into thinking they are going to die. And sadly, its chronic underdiagnosis increases the suffering of millions. Kelly Kropholler spent 17 years under the headset as an emergency dispatcher in California answering many hundreds of calls for both panic and heart attacks. Panic so closely mimicked a heart attack that it fooled even her practiced ears. “All of those physical symptoms of [peak] anxiety present as a heart attack clinically,” she told me, “[those suffering panic] breathe really shallow or really fast, feel sweaty, feel tightness in the chest, complain of numbness.” So it shouldn’t be surprising that, according to a study published in 2022 in the journal Psychiatry, 40% of patients presenting at the nation’s emergency departments with cardiac symptoms actually meet the criteria for “panic-related anxiety (i.e. panic attacks or panic disorder.)” That is over 3 million people a year think they’re having a heart attack when in fact they are enduring a panic attack. Read More: How I Handle Panic Attacks at Work That study also found that once panic patients are cleared of cardiac concerns—informed their heart is not the problem—only 1-2% of them are “evaluated and treated for anxiety in this setting.” Put differently, over 98% of patients go untreated for the ailment responsible for bringing them to the hospital. A different survey of ER departments, published in 2018 in the journal BMC Emergency Medicine, found that fewer than half are even informed that they’ve suffered a panic attack. Being told merely that “it’s not your heart,” without being told the source of your terrifying symptoms, can cause a one-off panic to bloom into full blown panic disorder. My own first brush with panic took place as I was defending my senior thesis in college. For years afterward, as my career in radio and TV progressed, I suffered what I thought of as “nerves” during my live reports. It would be 13 years before I would put a name to those bouts, recognizing them as the classic symptoms of panic disorder. It’s not that I lacked for introspection or self-awareness in that time; I had begun therapy at 12, was well versed in the language of anxiety, trauma, and treatment. It’s that panic is regarded in a way that differs from common anxiety—it is too often seen as a mark of someone self-evidently “broken.” Dr. Mitch Prinstein, Chief Science Officer at the American Psychological Association, laments the enormous gap between panic sufferers’ need for psychiatric support and what’s typically offered. Most Americans, he says, will remember the 15-minute dental hygiene lesson they got in kindergarten, which has helped prevent tooth decay and cavities in generations of children. “Where is the 15-minute intervention to stop emotional dysregulation, depression, suicidality, anxiety, substance use?” he asked.” Thirty-nine states plus Washington DC mandate sex education, but not a single state mandates mental health education. Why