CONNECT WITH US IDEAS PSYCHOLOGY FINDING POWER IN MY PANIC ATTACKS Finding Power in My Panic Attacks Getty Images IDEAS BY MATT GUTMAN SEPTEMBER 12, 2023 7:00 AM EDT Gutman is ABC News’s chief national correspondent. A multi-award winning reporter, Gutman contributes regularly to World News Tonight with David Muir, 20/20, Good Morning America, and Nightline. He is the author of No Time To Panic T rouble started in the form of rivulets of sweat dampening the waistband of my underwear. It was a bluebird afternoon in Phoenix in December of 2020, mid 60s, desert dry, and my heart was jackhammering against my ribcage. Breathing felt like I was sucking air through a stir straw. A small ABC News crew was arrayed before me, ready to broadcast the report I’d written that day, but with my vision narrowed to a needle’s eye, I could barely see them. I tried to swallow away the sandiness in my mouth but realized I’d forgotten how. “I can’t swallow! How do I swallow?” I quickly recognized my body’s reaction for what it was: not a stroke or a heart attack, but a panic attack. I knew this with certainty because I’d endured hundreds of moments like this in the past two decades. There was nothing specific that brought on this particular panic—and that’s what is often so terrorizing about them. More From TIME But the news waits for no panic attack. We were about to go live on World News Tonight, and the director counted me down for the live portion of my report. What first came out of my mouth was I imagine to be the sound a chicken makes when it lays an egg. Still, I managed to get through the report without an event, even if it wasn’t as polished as it was when I’d rehearsed it. My colleagues appeared to be none the wiser. Which, at the time was what I was going for. Panic in our society is encased in an almost impenetrable block of shame and stigma, and over two decades, I had become so ashamed by my bouts of panic that I’d assiduously hidden them, even from myself: When I documented them in my journals, I wrote in a kind of shorthand, a cuneiform indecipherable even to me. In the months prior to that Phoenix afternoon, I had given myself a crash course in panic. I read medical journals, books on evolutionary science, how-to guides. But I hadn’t yet summoned the courage to reveal my secret. Only my wife and my therapist knew of my hidden affliction. What I’d found in all that research stunned me. I learned panic was far more common than I’d imagined. According to a study published in the Journal of American Medicine, about 28% of Americans will experience a panic attack in their lifetime—that’s as many as 90 million people, more than the population of Germany. Many panic experts, like Dr. Michael Telch who heads University of Texas’s Laboratory for the Study