CONNECT WITH US HEALTH COVID-19 COVID-19 CASES ARE RISING. SHOULD YOU GET A BOOSTER SHOT? COVID-19 Cases Are Rising. Should You Get a Booster Shot? iStockphoto—Getty Images BY ALICE PARK AUGUST 2, 2023 5:36 PM EDT W ith summer travel in full swing, and masks a distant memory, it’s not entirely surprising that COVID-19 cases are creeping upward again. Along with the increase, some states in the U.S. are also recording upticks in COVID-19 hospitalizations, especially among older people. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), weekly hospitalizations have been rising slightly since the middle of June, from around 6,300 to more than 8,000 for the week ending July 22. The agency no longer reports on national case numbers since the end of the COVID-19 public health emergency in May, meaning state health departments were no longer required to report this data to the CDC. The trend reflects the waning immunity that most of the population has against SARS-CoV-2, since the last widespread recommendation for a booster shot was in April, when the CDC advised that most people receive a booster targeting the viral variants Omicron BA.4/5. These variants, however, have since been replaced by new ones, of the XBB variety, which means the protection the current booster provides is less than ideal. Earlier this year, US health officials decided to update the booster in the fall, but have yet to announce which variant to target, although it’s likely the new shot will focus on some version of the currently circulating XBB virus variant. More From TIME Until that happens, does it make sense to get another booster shot to better protect against getting infected? The answer to that really depends on your individual situation, says Dr. David Wohl, professor of medicine at the Institute of Global Health and Infectious Diseases at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. For people who are older, and may be traveling or otherwise find themselves in close quarters with other people, getting a booster now may make sense, especially if their last shot was more than three months ago. “If people are doing square dancing, playing bingo or going on cruises, and it’s been a long time since they were last vaccinated, they should probably top up sooner rather than later,” says Wohl. Existing boosters can still be effective The same goes for people with weakened immune systems, whom the CDC also recommends get boosted more regularly to keep their immunity as strong as possible. Even though the current booster does not specifically target the XBB viral variants that are currently circulating, it “is not chopped liver,” says Wohl. “It works because there are enough conserved parts of the variants that the existing vaccines continue to work.” They have been particularly effective in protecting people from getting seriously sick with COVID-19, which is why hospitalization, even though they are increasing slightly in some parts of the country, remain relatively low. But for most otherwise healthy people who take reasonable