precautions against getting infected, such as wearing masks in public settings and in poorly ventilated environments, waiting a few weeks for the updated booster may make sense. “I’m 59, I was vaccinated with the bivalent booster in September, and I’m pretty careful where I breathe without a mask,” says Wohl. “I will continue to do that and wait [to get boosted] because I know the consequences of my getting infected are probably pretty minimal.” Read More: COVID-19 Can Affect the Brain Even Long After an Infection Other experts believe it couldn’t hurt for even otherwise healthy people to get another booster now. “I believe that it’s important for those who feel they might be at risk for more severe disease, or for healthy people who feel they want maximum protection, to get a booster,” says Dr. Sandra Kemmerly, an infectious disease specialist at Ochsner Health in New Orleans. Kemmerly has written several prescriptions for the antiviral treatment Paxlovid for COVID-19 patients this week, and has seen more people hospitalized for the disease as well in recent weeks. “I don’t think that waiting for the updated booster to come around is necessarily prudent while we are seeing increased cases.” Kemmerly points out that those who might want more protection aren’t necessarily those with weakened immune systems, but people who might be on multiple medications or being treated with slightly immunosuppressive drugs like prednisone for a skin condition who might be at higher risk of both getting infected with COVID-19 and becoming seriously ill when they do. She acknowledges that there isn’t strong enough data showing that the current booster that targets Omicron BA.4/5 can protect against infection with the newer variants, but scientific precedent, such as with the flu shot, suggests that it can provide some protection, even if it’s not the maximum protection. Immunity from infection In addition, vaccines aren’t the only source of immunity. At this point in the pandemic, more people have also been infected with the virus, whether they have been vaccinated or not. While it’s not clear whether getting vaccinated or infected provides stronger protection, it’s likely the vaccine does protect people from getting seriously ill. Wohl points out that while we hear about cases of vaccinated people getting infected, we don’t hear about how often vaccinated people who are exposed to the virus don’t get infected. “I do believe there is some immunity [from the vaccine] against infection, or that people get transiently infected and knock out the virus before they develop symptoms,” he says. “But it’s hard to capture that in data.” The protection provided by the existing vaccine, even if it’s not optimal, is therefore still important, and could be contributing to the smaller peaks in cases than we’ve seen in the past. “Hopefully the surges will be more like surge-lets, because of immunity we have from vaccines and infections,” says Wohl. That is, at least until a new variant shows up that may escape all of this built up immunity. Then it’s