also a way to align what I say (and write) and what I do. Especially for anyone who manages other people or holds any sort of leadership role, there’s real value in making sure that what you put out on external-facing platforms (LinkedIn, for example) matches what you put out on internal communications (memos, praise for colleagues). Confidence can truly set you free. I often tell managers that the ages of 35 to 45 are among the hardest: For most people, that’s the time when you’re no longer the wunderkind, but you’re also not yet fully in charge, and there are often dozens of competing interests pulling at you—direct reports, higher ups, family and financial obligations. At the same time, this period is tough but it also sets us up with the skills and practical knowledge we eventually string together. I crossed that threshold while writing this column, and assure you that aging can be a most freeing thing. It’s not that I don’t care what others think (I do), but as I’ve grown older, I’ve developed an awareness of myself—my patterns, how I work, and what’s important to me—that feels really transformative and liberating. Each week, when I sit down to write, I’m reminded of the countless experiences that frame my lens and perspective. It’s a reminder that’s given me the confidence to not necessarily have to turn to an expert to assert an idea—I might be enough. This awareness has also made me more attuned than ever to the ways in which the people around me support my work and push me to improve, from my admin to editors, my family to readers like you. That may be the most valuable thing I’ve learned from writing this column over the past few years: that when it comes to productivity, cutting down the number of hours worked on something is only part of the equation. Writing this column took me three hours—or 30 years. A vital part of increasing output, efficiency and performance is reflection and understanding—of how you work, how you learn, who helps you to do your best, and all the work you’ve done before to arrive at the work in front of you. Read more from Charter