CONNECT WITH US PRODUCTIVITY The Introspection That Leads to Greater Productivity By S. Mitra Kalita September 19, 2023 7:30 AM EDT Of all the questions I have fielded in recent years about my entrepreneurial path and portfolio career, the most common is: How do you find time to write? That regularly forces some introspection (and tweaking) of my process. As we head into fall, which brings a natural reset with the start of the school year and the end of the summer lull, now feels like the right time to take stock of—and share—the productivity hacks I’ve discovered along the way. The most important: I finally learned to work fewer, more concentrated hours in order to get shit done. Treat a job like a job. I’ve spent 30-plus years as a journalist, and have been public and vocal for all 30 about how much I hate writing, but love having written. For much of my career, days before a deadline, my whole house would suffer as I talked incessantly about being behind, stayed up late and woke up early, dragged an open laptop to dinner and television watching and bedtime. I wrote two books and countless front-page stories under this messy system, and it was misery for me and everyone around me. When I landed a regular column, initially at Fortune magazine, I started to slip into the same habits. But this time, I also had a startup to launch and many side hustles to maintain in order to pay the mortgage, COBRA, and other expenses. Almost immediately, it became clear that the old ways would not work. One early lesson was to see the column dispassionately, as just another contract to complete. Many of us who write for a living, and even those watching from the outside, tend to romanticize the process and attach a lot of importance to every word and turn of phrase, from how a piece starts (lede) to how it ends (kicker). I could literally no longer afford to do so. What helped was the column’s regularity—a weekly cadence that allowed me to carve out time in a more structured way. Initially, I resisted, because inspiration and lofty thoughts seemed hard to schedule. But with free time less available than ever—I had one child leaving for college and a lot of other caregiving responsibilities—I realized pulling your laptop out doesn’t count as “working” when there’s no focus or output. Plus, it felt like the other people in my life rarely had my full attention. So I started to devote only Sundays and Monday mornings to the column, at least when it came to writing. That meant I could keep a Google Doc open on my laptop all week and jot down ideas but not dive in. When I switched the column over to Time and Charter two years ago, I tried to limit myself to outlining on Sunday nights and writing in the early hours of Monday morning. Today, I allow myself to still think