about the column all week—but really only write on Monday mornings to meet a noon deadline. I liken the process to “shift work,” and it’s made all the difference in preventing spillover into all other parts of my week and other work I need to complete. (Your mileage may vary on this one, but for me, working in a short burst right before or until a deadline also assures that a task will actually be completed.) Sign up for Charter's newsletter to get the handbook for the future of work delivered to your inbox. You can unsubscribe at any time. By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Use email more effectively. My column tends to be heavily reported. In the first year, I found myself juggling interviews for it (mostly via Zoom) with other meetings and projects throughout the week. This meant my brain had to frequently toggle between multiple tasks and revenue streams—say, interviewing an expert, hiring a new employee, designing decks for investors, and reviewing content-management systems. To cut down on context-switching and save my time and brainspace, I began turning to interviews conducted by email. I don’t advise this for everyone—especially people early in their career still establishing style, rapport, and relationships—but my Rolodex is extensive and I had faith. I would keep running Google docs with these threads of thoughts and interviews. Sometimes I would start a new doc (eventually I trained my administrative assistant to do this) with a fragment of an idea I might revisit; that also gave me multiple options at a time for the subject of the next column. An unexpected benefit: I began applying the process of being direct and targeted in email to other communications. It cuts down on meetings to get to know someone if you can say: “My schedule is packed, but I want to help/connect. Feel free to tell me what you are looking for.” Most contacts were grateful for this approach, because it spared their calendar, too. Also on email and focus: I sometimes use the productivity app Boomerang to pause my inbox while working on the column so I don’t have to deal with constant interruptions. Unexamined work is not worth doing. Socrates is said to have declared that an unexamined life is not worth living. It is no coincidence that this column is on working, juggling, diversity, equity, and inclusion, the future of capitalism. All of those subjects happen to be what I work on in my day job(s). Early on, I told my teams that my column is the best way to know what my priorities are and what keeps me up at night. A lot of founders and CEOs do this via threads on X (formerly Twitter) or other social media posts. I get about 1,000 words a week to really dive into a meaty subject and ways that employers and managers and all of us, really, might do better. It’s a privilege, but it’s