CONNECT WITH US PERSONAL FINANCE ADVERTISER DISCLOSURE PERSONAL FINANCE MANAGE & PLAN 7 Ways to Manage Financial Stress iStock Our evaluations and opinions are not influenced by our advertising relationships, but we may earn a commission from our partners’ links. This content is created independently from TIME’s editorial staff. Learn more. BY AJA MCCLANAHAN UPDATED JUNE 26, 2023 We’ve all felt financial stress in our lives at one time or another. Dealing with that financial stress can feel like a daunting task when you’re not sure where to begin. If you’re looking for ways to manage a financially stressful situation, here are some suggestions for taking charge of your money and feeling better about your circumstances. 1. Figure out where the money stress is coming from Start by identifying the main sources of money stress. Some common sources of financial stress include: Not being able to pay your bills, or not being able to pay your bills on time. High levels of debt. You don’t have money for emergency expenses, like if your car breaks down. You’ve lost your job or you’re worried that you might be laid off. You’re worried that you won’t be able to pay for an upcoming expense. When you understand the main sources of your financial stress, you’ll be able to better tackle the problem. List out your main stressors so you can brainstorm ways to start addressing those items. Set aside time two or three times a year to review and revise your list. As you consciously tackle your biggest money stressors, you’re more likely to make positive progress. 2. Create a budget or spending plan Just having a plan can help reduce your stress. The first thing you’ll want to do is figure out what your net income is. If you only have one full-time job, you can just look at your paycheck to figure out how much you take home each pay period. If you have a side gig, or a job with inconsistent hours, try averaging out how much you made over the last year or three months. Next, you’ll want to review or track your spending to see where your money is going. Figure out which of those expenses are absolutely necessary, and which can be cut down. Your budget should reflect what matters most to you and cut back on the items that aren’t as important. By ranking your spending and seeing exactly where the money has been going, you can make different choices. Use a budget to understand when you have money coming in, as well as knowing when your bills are due. With the help of a budget, you can set up a system that keeps you on track with your spending and saving goals while potentially reducing your stress levels. By integrating Simplifi, a budgeting software, into your budgeting system, you can streamline your financial planning process, achieve your spending and saving goals more efficiently, and alleviate stress related to money management. 3. Start an emergency