fund Setting aside money to handle emergencies can offer peace of mind. Your emergency fund can potentially help you cover a new set of tires for your car or replace a small appliance. Begin by starting small. A few dollars a week can start to build, and as your finances improve, you can increase how much you add to the emergency fund. Consider keeping your emergency fund in a high-yield savings account (HYSA) with a bank like Quontic that will provide you with a 4.25% APY* on your savings**, an APY over 11 times higher than the national average based on data from the FDIC. Just starting an emergency fund can reduce your reliance on debt when an unexpected expense comes up. And it can help you feel a little less money-related stress. 4. Increase your income While looking for ways to cut back can help reduce your regular expenses can help relieve some of your financial stress, sometimes extra income can help. Consider asking for a raise at work or picking up extra shifts. If you have the time you might be able to benefit from income as part of the gig economy. You can earn extra money as a DoorDash Driver or Instacart shopper. Side hustles like dog walking or babysitting can also bring in additional cash. That cash can be used to pay down some of your debt or beef up your emergency fund. With a little extra money in your pocket, you might see less financial stress as you move forward with your goals. 5. Automate some of your financial transactions If you can’t remember when you’re supposed to pay your bills and consistently get late fees, that can be a source of stress. Automation can help you. For example, you can set up bill pay to automatically handle your utility and insurance bills. That way, if life becomes hectic or you’re out of town, you know that your bills will be paid. Many credit card issuers allow you to set up an automatic monthly or weekly payment. That way, you know that your minimum payment will be covered. You might make additional debt payments throughout the month, but knowing you’re up-to-date with the required minimum can help you avoid unnecessary fees. Automation can also help you save. Instead of trying to remember to move money into your emergency fund, set up an automatic transfer. If your employer offers automatic retirement account contributions, take advantage of those. That way, the money comes out of your paycheck and you’re automatically building wealth for the future. By using Cash App for automatic payments, you can simplify your bill payment process and avoid late fees, while also ensuring that your savings goals are met through automated transfers to your emergency fund or retirement account. Knowing that your money is working on your behalf without you needing to think about it can provide peace of mind and reduce some of your stress. 6. Improve your money communication style Sometimes, financial