CONNECT WITH US COVID What Workplaces Should Be Doing About Covid Right Now By Cari Nazeer September 10, 2023 7:30 AM EDT While the US may be out of the pandemic phase, the country is still currently in the midst of another Covid surge. Hospitalizations and deaths remain low, but have been ticking steadily and significantly upward in recent weeks. With workplace mask and vaccine mandates largely a thing of the past—and many workplaces now doubling down on return-to-office mandates following Labor Day—we reached out to Susan Peters, a research scientist at Harvard’s Center for Work, Health, and Wellbeing, for insight into how employers should be thinking about Covid right now. Here are excerpts from our conversation, lightly edited for length and clarity: What might an effective workplace education campaign around Covid safety look like now? We all know that handwashing is important. We’re all fairly comfortable taking Covid tests if we have symptoms now. It’s more communicating to your workforce about the policies and programs and practices that are in place to support them. For example: ‘We’re seeing an uptick in cases. It could be that your child is going to come home from school sick, or you are unwell. We encourage you to take a Covid test to see if it’s Covid, but regardless, if you’re sick, you probably shouldn’t be at work. We want you to recover and bring your best self to work. These are the policies in place to support you: You can take sick time off, you can convert your work over into remote work if you’re an office worker, but these are the caveats around it. You need to tell us when you’re doing that. This is the process for putting that in place.’ Most employers who had vaccine mandates have dropped them by now. How do you see workplaces addressing worker vaccination during this latest wave, if at all? Whether we go back to mandates, who knows? I don’t have a crystal ball, and vaccine mandates are not something that I have looked at a lot in my research… [But] I think there has to be an educational component about why a certain vaccine, whether it’s the flu vaccine, Covid, whatever it might be, is important. A lot of the time it’s like, ‘Well, my family doesn’t want me to get it.’ So if you provide them with education about why it could be important for both their health and the health of their families, then they can make a decision. Some of the issues that we saw were when people were told that they needed to get a vaccine without any information, or conflicting information. It becomes really hard. You’re getting mixed messages. You don’t know whether you should be doing what A says or what B says. So you can provide education about that sort of stuff, but it needs to be provided in a way that people are going to receive well. What do you make of this uptick