in Covid cases now coinciding with an uptick in return-to-office mandates? If they’re forcing people back to these spaces and they’re not really thinking about how people are working together, if they have poor air quality, if they’re expecting them to catch public transport where they’re probably going to catch it, are they going to see an uptick in the office? Probably, and that’s going to be impactful in itself. Is it going to be a productive workforce if everyone’s sick, either at work or at home? There needs to be a conversation around, how do we do this? And if we can’t do it in a way that’s actually going to be beneficial for the worker and the organization, then should we be doing it? What else should workplaces be thinking about or prioritizing right now in terms of Covid? Talking to their workers. It’s been a little while since we’ve had an uptick as big as this, but what worked really well last time? What were we missing? What did we not do so well? And how can we start to build that into what we’re doing now? What are people’s comfort levels? We are learning to live with Covid. It’s not going to go away. And so how do we put in place those processes so that workers feel supported, so it’s not just management coming in saying, ‘You know what, this is what’s going to happen’ and workers are like, ‘That doesn’t really work for me’? You need to have your workers involved in those decisions that you’re making. Also reminding people, ‘If you do have concerns or there’s something that we missed, we want to hear from you and this is the mechanism for you to do that. We’ll take whatever you say really seriously and we’ll pull that information together to see how we can improve our policies, programs, and practices to support you better.’ I don’t think this is just a Covid problem. I think this is, how do we manage your health? If you need a mental-health day, how do you manage it? Burnout is at an all-time high. There are so many other health things that we’re struggling with at the moment, and Covid is just one of them. And so make sure that workers know what they can do, what’s available to them if they’re struggling with managing things. Who do they talk to? Is there an EAP [employee assistance program] for that? Whatever it might be, just knowing that there’s a process in place. Read our interviews with Jennifer Nuzzo, director of the Pandemic Center at Brown School of Public Health, on the end of vaccine mandates, and with Joseph Allen, associate professor at the Harvard School of Public Health and the author of Healthy Buildings, on making offices healthier for workers. Read more from Charter The Introspection That Leads to Greater Productivity The Best Tab Managers for Productivity The Lesson for Employers at the Center of Hollywood's AI