CONNECT WITH US IDEAS RACE WHITE WOMEN MUST DO MORE TO CONFRONT RACISM White Women Must Do More To Confront Racism Getty Images IDEAS BY SAIRA RAO AND REGINA JACKSON DECEMBER 3, 2022 8:28 AM EST Rao and Jackson are the founders of Race2Dinner, a program that initiates and empowers radically honest conversations about race and oppression. Deconstructing Karen, the documentary about Regina Jackson and Saira Rao's work, is out now. They are the authors of White Women: Everything You Already Know About Your Own Racism and How to Do Better I n 2019, we decided to host anti-racism events in white women’s dining rooms for one specific reason: To turn the age-old adage, “it’s rude to talk about politics at the dinner table” on its head. This is what we’ve learned—if you don’t talk about racism, you can’t dismantle it. But it isn’t just over the dinner table that this “niceness” rules. In the aftermath of George Floyd’s murder in 2020, you were eager, frenzied even, to do this work. A mere two years later, not only is that excitement for anti-racism work gone, the pendulum has swung in the other direction, into a verifiable whitelash against anti-racism work. If white womanhood is a house, your need to be perfect is the foundation. It is this need for perfection that makes it impossible to engage in antiracism work. Being perfect is the key to your happiness, to your success, to your very existence. Perfect hair. Perfect clothes. Perfect grades. Perfect nails. Perfect weddings. Perfect bodies. Perfect adoring and supportive wife and mother. Perfect employee and colleague. White skin. The foundational principle of perfection in a white supremacist society like ours is rooted in whiteness. Without it, your A’s will never be straight enough, your MVP trophies not shiny enough, your flowery dresses a bit wilted. Of course, white skin alone doesn’t render you perfect, but without it, you have no chance. White skin is a necessary (yet still insufficient) ingredient of perfection. The con, of course, is there is no actual recipe for perfection, as there is no such thing as perfection. More from TIME Read More: How the ‘Karen Meme’ Confronts the Violent History of White Womanhood This makes your endless quest for perfection a trap. You will never be pretty enough. You will never be thin enough. You will never be smart enough or successful enough or rich enough. You will never be enough. Yet white women will die trying. Especially over dinner. We call it the “Three Point Plan for Perfectionism.” It goes like this: You’ve been taught generation after generation that talking about politics over a meal is rude. Being rude is the enemy of perfection. Being perfect is your number one life goal, so you will not talk about racism. White women regularly mention having been “burned” on social media for saying the “wrong thing.” You have been publicly humiliated, often at the hands of a fellow white woman, who is angling to show