writers strikes also helped torpedo Winning Time. Marquee names like John C. Reilly and breakout performers like Quincy Isaiah, who portrayed Magic Johnson with expert charisma, could not raise awareness of the show most of this summer due to SAG rules against promoting struck work. “I probably was the biggest mouthpiece for the show,” says Pearlman. “And that’s horrible.” Winning Time had so many more stories to mine: the Lakers’ victories over the Celtics in 1985 and 1987, the rise of Michael Jordan in Chicago, Abdul-Jabbar’s retirement in 1989, Riley’s exit in 1990, and Johnson’s shocking HIV diagnosis in 1991. And it featured a young, diverse cast with which to mine them. “We have a slew of young Black actors and actresses,” says Pearlman. “We actually had a show with an enormously diverse cast playing enormously diverse roles. That was really important and really cool.” The show traced the modern era of player empowerment to Johnson. He and Buss formed more of a partnership than the typical employee-employer relationship. Johnson was pilloried for demanding a trade in 1981, as he chafed under Lakers coach Paul Westhead. But Johnson prevailed: Buss fired Westhead, Riley took over, and Los Angeles kept winning titles. In today’s NBA, players increasingly call the shots on where they work and who they work with. “Even though this show is about the past, it still touches on the zeitgeist of today,” says Winning Time executive producer and writer Rodney Barnes. “As a writer of color, it’s rare you get the opportunity to talk about history and the present at the same time.” That opportunity is now gone, unless another streamer or network revives Winning Time. “Netflix Needs To Pick Up Winning Time,” wrote NBA agent Nate Jones on X. The show’s creators won’t dismiss that possibility. “In a world where Frasier is about to premiere a new season, the long-term view is the best view to take,” says Borenstein. Perhaps some of the outrage over Winning Time’s cancellation will compel more viewers to check it out on Max: strong binge numbers could make the case for a resurrection. “Things have a tendency on Winning Time to work out better than I’ve planned them,” says Hecht. “We’ve had to go back to square one a bazillion times. Somehow, some way, HBO not continuing with the series at this time will end up being better for the show. I just have a feeling things always work out for Winning Time.” Here’s hoping that’s more than wishful thinking. Lakers fans especially can do their part. Watch Winning Time for the first time, if you haven’t done so. Even give it a rewatch on Max. “I would say this to Lakers fans directly,” says Hecht. “If you don’t watch, the Celtics win.” MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping