“Wtf HBO?” wrote one social media user. “HBO Cancelled ‘Winning Time’ in the Hackiest Way Possible,” read one headline. Someone started a change.org petition to save the show. It was a crushing ending for a show that deserved better. While the creative team behind Winning Time has expressed sincere gratitude to HBO for their support for the series, they couldn’t mask their disappointment. Over the last week or so, word spread to the Winning Time producers that the show was indeed ending. Despite a passionate fan base and critical kudos, the ratings could not support the expensive budget needed to recreate 1980s basketball arenas, locker rooms, and front offices (not to mention the Busses’ former sprawling home, the Pickfair estate). HBO suggested to the Winning Time creative team, while the show was still in production back in January, to consider shooting an alternative ending that sort of wrapped up the show, in case cancellation was inevitable. That’s why the scene with the Busses, and the title cards, were added. The version shared with critics earlier this summer ended Season 2 at the conclusion of the ‘84 Finals, with Johnson in the shower. Winning Time co-creator Max Borenstein has called Season 2 the show’s “Empire Strikes Back” season. While the first season ended with a Lakers championship victory in 1980, this time, the Dark Side—the Boston Celtics—prevailed. “I understand why there was a desire, given the sort of Sophie's choice of where we were at, to put a bit of a button on it,” says Borenstein. “Personally, my preference would have been to end this show in the way we conceived the season. I love Magic in the shower. Ending on a pure emotion is a good ending. Even if it's a sh-tty emotion.” The show’s other creator, Jim Hecht, had to console his wife, who broke down in tears after the finale aired. He explained to his stepchildren, who are 12 and 11, what cancellation means. “I’m writing a Tupac book right now,” says Pearlman. “If my last chapter ended with a celebration of Biggie, that would be a very weird way to end the Tupac book. That’s how I kind of thought of it. You’re ending the series with the Celtics winning the title? That’s insane. But it’s way above my pay grade.” An HBO spokesperson did not respond to TIME’s request to speak to CEO Casey Bloys. The decision reflects the sad realities of modern media. Warner Bros. Discovery, HBO’s parent company, lost 1.8 million streaming subscribers from April 1 to June 30, the period in which the streamer Max, which combined the offerings of HBO Max and Discovery+, launched. Warner Bros. Discovery stock is down 24% since Feb. 1. From the get-go, Warner Bros. Discovery CEO David Zaslav has shown a proclivity for cutting programming, angering fans and subscribers by even shelving highly anticipated projects like a Batgirl movie that would have been the first major superhero film starring a Latina actor. The ongoing Hollywood actors and