CONNECT WITH US ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION THE FINALE WAS WRONG ON SO MANY LEVELS The Winning Time Finale Was Wrong on So Many Levels BY SEAN GREGORY SEPTEMBER 19, 2023 12:50 PM EDT A s a fan of Winning Time, the HBO drama starring John C. Reilly, Adrien Brody, Gaby Hoffman and a slew of promising up-and-coming actors that chronicles the fast-breaking, fast-living 1980s “Showtime” Los Angeles Lakers, I was aware that the ratings for the show weren’t great. Jeff Pearlman, the author whose book about the Lakers dynasty the show was based on, had taken to social media over the past few weeks, and warned that Winning Time needed more eyeballs to survive. An eventual cancellation would not have come as a shock. But watching a cancellation in real time sure did. I’m no TV historian. But I struggle to remember ever seeing a show that basically announced “this thing is dead” as it aired. Usually, word trickles out before a season finale that the plug has been pulled. Or an announcement follows days or weeks after. So when I saw what I figured was the last scene of Winning Time’s second season on the evening of Sept. 17—Magic Johnson sitting forlorn in a disgusting old Boston Garden shower, after losing Game 7 of the 1984 NBA Finals to his blood rival, Larry Bird—I held out hope that the show would live on. No way HBO could end Winning Time with a Lakers loss, right? Wrong. Seconds later, the show cut to a tacked-on scene featuring Reilly as chest-hair-sporting Lakers owner Jerry Buss and Hadley Robinson as his daughter, current Lakers owner Jeanie Buss, sitting at halfcourt of an empty Great Western Forum. They toasted their good fortune to still own a juggernaut that was the Lakers. “We f-cking own this!” they shout. Okaaay. Then, the gut punch: title cards explaining the future accomplishments and tribulations of main characters like Johnson, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Pat Riley, Jeanie Buss, and others. Information that, for one thing, is very well known to even casual sports fans, which had to make up the great majority of Winning Time’s viewing audience. And what’s worse, it was information that, sure as Abdul-Jabbar’s sky hook, signaled a series ending. For if Winning Time were to continue, why would the producers write the ending for each character on the screen? Reilly and Robinson in what turned out to be the series finale Courtesy of HBO Feeling a mix of confusion, betrayal, and apprehension—not ideal emotions after watching your favorite Sunday night show, before the work week—I joined thousands of other fans in Googling something along the lines of “Winning Time canceled.” Did I miss something during the week? Turns out, no. Because there they were, embargoed articles released around 10 PM eastern time, right as Winning Time was ending, officially confirming the cancellation. Now I was just angry. Hey, HBO: I didn’t watch a scripted show about my favorite sport, basketball, to get angry. Others shared such frustration.