CONNECT WITH US ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION YOU DON’T HAVE TO LIKE WRESTLING TO LOVE NETFLIX’S EXCELLENT You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers BY JUDY BERMAN SEPTEMBER 19, 2023 1:05 PM EDT O hio Valley Wrestling is making a movie. The regional pro wrestling league, which launched Hollywood stars John Cena and Dave Bautista, puts on a rousing weekly live event and local broadcast. But in an early episode of Netflix’s Wrestlers, in advance of a crucial pay-per-view show, OVW co-owner and CEO Al Snow has cinematic ambitions. He’s just bought a hyperrealistic $70 pig mask from a party store. “My crew,” he explains, “consists of one guy and a camera and sometimes a flashlight.” And he’s about to spend all night in an overgrown field with a bunch of topless musclemen, directing a clip that sends the wrestlers to hell to fight a demon heel. “Gosh, I love wrestling!” Snow chuckles, hoisting a heavy mat above his head. The sequence encapsulates what creator Greg Whiteley is up to with this riveting seven-part documentary, which follows OVW through a pivotal season, as Snow clashes with new co-owners and the future of the league hangs in the balance. Whiteley is known for the humane Netflix community-college sports docuseries Last Chance U and Cheer. Yet his latest project for the streamer frames its subjects less as athletes than as outsider artists, devoting their lives to captivating their dwindling audiences and preserving what might be a dying lifestyle. Each match skillfully combines choreography and improv. The line between self and persona blurs. Wrestling may not be your passion—it isn’t mine—but Wrestlers resonates beyond the ring. It’s about the scrappy vitality of independent entertainment in a world where it’s direly undervalued. Al Snow in Wrestlers Netflix For those of us who need a crash course in wrestling, Whiteley recruits journalists to clarify the condescending misconception that fans believe these fights are real. Of course they’re in on the artifice; they’re invested in the personalities and story lines, like the viewers of any scripted entertainment. The diehards who follow the Louisville-based OVW, described by The Ringer’s David Shoemaker as “one of the last remnants of the regional wrestling system,” aren’t so different from midnight-movie devotees or punk fans crowding into church basements to access a more raw, less commercialized experience than mainstream outlets provide. (OVW also books a church rec room in one episode; the faux-clergyman wrestler Rev. Ronnie ends up relegated to the sidelines.) Unlike the handsomely compensated stars of national behemoths WWE and AEW, these wrestlers are DIY artists, taking crappy second jobs to support their passion. At the center of the shoestring operation is Snow, a WWF/WWE alumnus best remembered for playing a mentally ill character who projected his psychosis onto a mannequin head that he used as a prop in his fights. As that remarkable backstory, which came out of the wrestler’s study of abnormal psychology, suggests, Snow is fascinating enough to fuel an entire documentary series of