one. Blood pours from Maria’s scalp. The match is hardly Snow’s idea; he isn’t a fan of baroque spectacles that detract from the skill of the performers, and when it’s happening he can hardly watch. It’s Maria who loves doing deathmatches. When Haley confesses on camera that she’s dreading the event, too, a producer asks why she agreed to do it. Her response: “It’s good storytelling.” Maria James, left, and HollyHood Haley J in Wrestlers Netflix Even if you find deathmatch wrestling barbaric, it’s hard to disagree. Whiteley captures the rapt expressions on the faces of fans in the venue, and it’s no mystery why they’re so absorbed in Haley and Maria’s violent reenactment of the darkest aspects of their relationship. The pathos and masochism and catharsis really do add up to a form of art—one not so different from Marina Abramović’s most extreme performances or the self-harming ’70s stage antics of Iggy Pop. (What goes unsaid, but is doubly relevant in light of the fact that Wrestlers appears on global streaming monolith Netflix, is that OVW is at risk of extinction for the same reason that local independent arts venues have become so hard to sustain: because the increasingly powerful giants within an increasingly consolidated entertainment industry are crowding it out.) As Bryan Kennison, a commentator who spends much of the season running errands and negotiating small-time sponsorships in an effort to justify his full-time salary, sees it, the WWE and AEW are “a Michael Bay action movie. That’s awesome. But you know what? When you come to OVW, you’re getting The Squid and the Whale.” Something from Roger Corman’s low-budget exploitation canon might have made a more obvious analogy. But hey, if you’re a Noah Baumbach fan who can appreciate a no-holds-barred throwdown between a flawed parent and a disgruntled child, well, that is just one of the many deeply human stories you’ll find in Wrestlers. MORE MUST-READS FROM TIME The Case for Mediocrity How Russia Is Recruiting Cubans to Fight in Ukraine Paul Hollywood Answers All of Your Questions About The Great British Baking Show Meet the 2023 TIME100 Next: the Emerging Leaders Shaping the World Oprah and Arthur C. Brooks: How to Separate Work From Your Identity How Canada and India's Relationship Crumbled You Don’t Have to Like Wrestling to Love Netflix’s Excellent Wrestlers The Most Anticipated Books, Movies, TV, and Music of Fall 2023 Want Weekly Recs on What to Watch, Read, and More? Sign Up for Worth Your Time CONTACT US AT LETTERS@TIME.COM.